                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full  of extraordinarily shaped creatures,  but how have the stretched bodies of some given them an edge?  I have had the fortune to meet  some of the planet's most enchanting creatures, but some  stand out more than others, because of their intriguing biology.
  Our knowledge of some of these creatures extends back centuries.
  Others we have discovered more recently.
  In this series, I share their stories  and reveal why they are considered natural curiosities.
  In this programme, I investigate two creatures  that have taken the ordinary and made it extraordinary,  the chameleon that has an extra-long tongue to catch prey   and the giraffe with a neck so long it can reach the top of trees.
  How and why have these animals stretched nature to the limit?   The chameleon is a truly bizarre creature,  both in its behaviour and its appearance unlike anything else on earth.
  So, not surprisingly, it's given rise to all kinds of legends and myths.
  This is The History Of The Four-Footed Beasts by Edward Topsell,  written in the 17th century,  and he calls the chameleon "a fraudulent, ravening and gluttonous beast,  "impure and unclean by the law of God.
"  Some believed it was constructed by the devil from parts of other animals,  the tail of a monkey, the skin of a crocodile,  the tongue of a toad, the horns of a rhinoceros,  and the eyes of who knows what.
  It was a creature sent to the world to spy for a demon master.
  When I first came face to face with a chameleon, more than 50 years ago,  I was struck not only by its beauty  but intrigued by its strange body, particularly by its tongue.
  The outlandish appearance of the chameleon  made it much sought after by curiosity hunters.
  But scientists and naturalists, too,  were greatly puzzled by its extraordinary behaviour and anatomy.
  It looked and behaved like no other reptile.
  Even today, we are still discovering new things  about its unique eyes, its astonishing tongue  and its ability to change its appearance.
  Chameleons are notoriously hard to find, partly because they move so slowly,  but also because they match their surroundings  in terms of colour so very well.
  This one in front of me is a dwarf chameleon from Natal in South Africa.
  If that's threatened by a snake,  it doesn't bother to change its colour very much,  because a snake's colour vision is not very good,  but if it's threatened by a bird, it does camouflage itself very well indeed.
  Some species of chameleon, and there are 85 different species in the family,  can even fine-tune their camouflage.
  If they detect a snake approaching from below,  they become lighter in colour and so less noticeable against the sky.
  On the other hand, if the threat comes from a bird,  they become darker to match the background beneath them.
  A chameleon's colour is affected not only by its surroundings,  but by the temperature and the light and its emotional state.
  Behind this screen, there's a rival male.
  Let's see what happens if I remove the screen and let them see one another.
  This highly coloured male is dominant,  and he immediately adds bright, aggressive colours to his display.
  The other male remains dark  and too frightened to change colour and fight back.
  It's clear who is the boss.
  Chameleons are emotional creatures.
  Darker colouration signals anger.
  This female, on the right, is not in the mood to accept the approaches  of this brightly coloured and hopeful male.
  Exactly how chameleons achieved such dramatic colour changes  greatly puzzled early naturalists.
  An Englishman named Barrow, who travelled in Africa in the 19th century,  thought the change in colour was caused by something to do with air.
  He wrote, "Previous to the chameleon assuming a change in colour,  "it makes a long inspiration,  "the body swelling out to twice its usual size,  "and as this inflation subsides, the change of colour gradually takes place.
"  Well, that's an accurate observation of what happens  when a chameleon gets angry, and then its anger subsides,  but actually the change of colour has nothing to do with air.
  A French biologist, Milne-Edwards, soon after that got it about right.
  He wrote, "There exist two layers of membranous pigment  "placed one above the other  "but disposed in such a way to appear simultaneously under the cuticle  "and sometimes in such a manner that one may hide the other,"  which is indeed so.
  Today we know that the chameleon's skin  has three layers of expandable pigmented cells called chromatophores.
  They contain red, yellow, blue and white pigments  with a deeper layer of darker melanin which controls the reflection of light.
  The chameleons use colour change not only to camouflage themselves,  but also to communicate with one another.
  Anyone who looks closely at a chameleon is bound to be fascinated by its eyes.
  They protrude on either side of its head as though they were mounted on turrets,  and, in fact, their eyelids are fused together,  except for one tiny spot right in the middle.
  But the most extraordinary thing about them is that they move independently.
  So, that means the chameleon, at one and the same time,  can be viewing above it and below it.
  So, any insect that lands nearby is going to be spotted almost immediately.
  It seems that its brain receives separate messages from each eye  and views them and receives them, alternately, very fast,  but independent to one another.
  They are not integrated.
  But the advantage of that  is that it does give this all-round, three-dimensional view,  which is unrivalled.
  This extraordinary vision is an essential element  in the way that the chameleon uses its most astonishing feature,  its hugely elongated tongue.
  How this tongue worked, and its construction,  greatly intrigued early naturalists, and understandably.
  This remarkable preserved specimen  shows us in detail the impressive elongated tongue of a chameleon.
  The physical structure of the chameleon's tongue was easy enough to explain,  although it proved to be a somewhat complicated organ,  a hollow tube with a tapered, cartilaginous rod at its base.
  The pad at the end was thought to be rough and sticky,  so that it could snag its prey.
  But the mystery of how a contraption like this  could be lengthened and projected out of the mouth  took a little longer to fully explain.
  Perhaps the way a frigate bird inflates the balloon under its beak,  or how a calling frog blows up its throat sac  could give clues.
  Both do it with air.
  Or maybe the tentacles that carry a snail's eyes.
  It projects them by using its blood as a hydraulic fluid.
  But none of them fitted the bill.
  It's a much more complex process.
  The tongue is a muscular tube that, when relaxed, sits on a rod of cartilage.
  When the chameleon is ready to strike,  muscles at the back of the tongue push it into launch position.
  When the prey is lined up and the distance calculated,  super-fast muscles contract and propel the tongue forward at lightning speed.
  As the tongue shoots off the end of the cartilage,  an extra wave of energy drives it forward to its target.
  Then, like a stretched elastic band,  its elasticity pulls it back into the chameleon's mouth.
  Recently, high-speed images revealed a new detail.
  The tip of the tongue, once thought to be sticky,  is covered in microscopic protrusions that generate suction and secures its prey.
  Chameleons really are the most extraordinary creatures  and they hold surprises for us even today.
  Only this year, a scientist working in Madagascar  discovered a tiny little chameleon, only 29mm long.
  It's the smallest known vertebrate in the world.
  It's astounding to realise that all the organs of a vertebrate's body  could be fitted into such a tiny little creature,  including that extraordinary tongue.
  Next is the story of another amazing elongated structure,  not a tongue but a neck.
  The giraffe is an animal that can't fail to impress.
  Up to 6m, or 19 feet, in height, it's hugely imposing,  intriguing in appearance and mysterious in its biology.
  Our attraction to this unusual creature goes back centuries,  and one feature, in particular, has piqued our curiosity,  its elongated neck.
  Such a structure seemed an impossibility of nature,  but now we better understand the complex biology behind the giraffe's bizarre body.
  Our growing knowledge of this creature  can be traced back to three very special giraffes  and the story of a royal fascination for the exotic.
  In the 19th century, a giraffe named Zarafa, Arabic for "Charming One",  made a big impact on Europe, socially and scientifically.
  She was one of three captured in 1826 at the order of the Viceroy of Egypt,  who wanted to use them as gifts to curry favour with France, Austria and England.
  Zarafa, the strongest of the three, was given to the French,  seen here in a painting by Jacques Raymond Brascassat.
  She travelled from Egypt to Marseille by ship.
  On reaching France, her keepers felt it was too risky to continue by boat  so the decision was made to walk Zarafa from Marseille in the south  all the way to Paris, an overland journey of more than 550 miles.
  To some, this looked like a journey doomed to failure,  but careful planning and the unique biology of the giraffe were in its favour.
  Very wisely, a forward-thinking and eminent French scientist  called Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire  was put in charge of the giraffe.
  But there was something very significant about Zarafa  that would be key to the success of her long journey.
  It was her age.
  She was a youngster, just eight months old.
  Baby giraffes are very robust  and can stand up and run within an hour of being born.
  They have particularly long legs in relation to their bodies,  only half a metre shorter than those of an adult.
  Such long legs help them keep up with their mothers,  so young Zarafa was well equipped for walking.
  Crucial, too, was the fuel for Zarafa's journey.
  Young giraffe suckle for up to a year, and Zarafa was bottle-fed.
  Throughout the journey she drank up to 25 litres of milk a day,  supplied by three milking cows.
  She marched on at a steady pace with her trusty entourage.
  After nearly 200 miles, Zarafa reached Lyon  and Saint-Hilaire broke the walk.
  He hoped to put Zarafa onto a boat to go downriver for the rest of the journey.
  As they waited, 30,000 people flocked to see Zarafa.
  To the public, she was a strange and exotic creature,  and they were intrigued why such a long neck should exist  and curious about how an animal could support its weight.
  In those early days, giraffe were seen as freaks,  strange, horned camels,  whose humps had been flattened by the stretching of their necks.
  But this was exactly what attracted Saint-Hilaire to Zarafa.
  He was fascinated by genetic exaggerations and how they came to be.
  Clearly, the giraffe's long neck enables them to feed  on leaves beyond the reach of other browsers.
  But how could they physically hold up such a long neck, vertically?  Ha-ha!  Studies of giraffe anatomy have revealed just how the neck is supported.
  A long, thick ligament, like a cable, runs the whole length of the neck.
  This counterbalances the weight of the head and the neck,  and in its relaxed position it's tight.
  So, keeping the neck straight and the head up involves very little muscular effort.
  Bending the neck to reach down is more difficult,  because the tough ligament has to be stretched.
  But was the ability to feed from tall trees  the only reason for having a long neck?  As the habits of the giraffe in the wild became better known,  people discovered that rival males fought one another by jousting with their necks.
  Was that the reason that they had developed long necks?  But then someone pointed out that the females had long necks too,  so that suggestion was discarded.
  In truth, there isn't a neat single answer,  but access to high food, better vigilance and temperature regulation  may all have shaped the giraffe's long neck.
  As she walked on, Zarafa continued to attract inquisitive onlookers.
  Few had set eyes on such a creature.
  She appeared a natural impossibility.
  How could a giraffe pump the blood up such a long neck to its brain?  And why didn't the blood rush back down into its feet?  The giraffe's neck may be very tall,  but, in fact, it contains exactly the same number of bones as our own,  that is to say, seven,  but its blood pressure is twice as high as ours.
  In fact, it's higher than any other known animal.
  The pump that produces this pressure, the heart,  surprisingly, is not particularly big,  but it is hugely powerful.
  This is the left ventricle that has been cut through  and you can see how thick the muscle is, getting on for about 8cm.
  This great pump produces blood, squirts it up the artery to the head,  and then, when it comes down through the jugular vein,  there are pocket-shaped valves  which prevent the blood from flowing backwards into the head  if the animal lowers its head in order to have a drink.
  Giraffes find it very awkward to drink from the ground  and, in fact, they rarely do so.
  They get most of their water from leaves and shoots.
  The only way to get their mouths down to the water is to splay their forelegs,  or bend them at the wrist joint.
  The giraffe, in fact, has a relatively short neck, compared to its legs.
  Antelope and zebra can reach down to the ground without bending their legs.
  Only the giraffe and its rain forest relative, the okapi,  have necks that are so short, relative to their legs,  that they must splay or bend them.
  So, perhaps the most remarkable feature of the giraffe is the length of its legs.
  They certainly were key to Zarafa's success.
  At Lyon, there was a plan to rest her legs from walking  and to finish the journey to Paris by boat.
  But all didn't go according to plan.
  The boat didn't appear in Lyon so she walked on and finally got to Paris.
  It took her a total of 41 days to complete the journey of 550 miles to Paris.
  Saint-Hilaire, her trusty companion, was exhausted, but the giraffe was very fit.
  He wrote, "She gained weight and much more strength from the exercise.
  "Her muscles were more defined,  "her coat smoother and glossier upon her arrival than they were in Marseille.
"  Zarafa was presented to King Charles X  and temporarily installed in a greenhouse  in the grounds of the Jardin des Plantes.
  She was a true animal ambassador  and 60,000 people saw her in the first three weeks in Paris.
  In the early 19th century, giraffes were a novelty  and their biology and lives in the wild were still a mystery.
  Zarafa's success was due to a unique interplay  of the giraffe's unusual characteristics and good timing.
  Her youth, long legs and a diet with milk powered her journey right across France.
  A body that was first considered bizarre was revealed to be perfectly evolved.
  Our story began with three giraffe that were given to Europe.
  Zarafa was the most robust of them and she lived a further 18 years.
  The Austrian one lasted just a year,  and the one sent to King George IV of England died after two.
  Saint-Hilaire learnt much from Zarafa  and he became a key figure in the blossoming zoological research in France.
  The giraffe brought to England triggered a surge of interest in animal research  that shifted the centre of zoological gravity from France to England.
  So, we can thank Zarafa for her early role in unravelling the biological mysteries  of the giraffe's extraordinary body and stretched neck.
  Creatures like the outlandish giraffe and chameleon  continue to reveal their biological secrets.
  They really are true natural curiosities.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: How did two small animals from opposite ends of the world  upset the reputations of leading scientists  and change our understanding of evolution?  I've been lucky enough, one way or another,  to meet some of our planet's most enchanting creatures   but some I find particularly intriguing.
  We've known about some of these creatures for centuries.
  Others we have discovered more recently.
  In this series, I share their stories  and reveal why they really are natural curiosities.
  In this programme, we explore the stories of two animals  that sent shock waves through the scientific world and beyond.
  One is a toad that became the centre of a scientific storm  and caused accusations of fakery in the early part of the 20th century.
  The other is an Australian animal  that baffled the greatest thinkers of Victorian Europe  and caused many to question whether it was even real.
   When the first Europeans arrived in Australia,  they were shocked by the animals they found there.
  Nothing in Europe could compare with the bizarre, upright grazers  hopping across the grassland landscape, carrying their young in pouches.
  Kangaroos were obvious oddities,  but another even stranger creature also caught the attention of early settlers.
  It lived along river banks and swam in the water.
  Those first Europeans who saw it called it a water mole.
  But that name didn't last long.
  Inside this box  is one of the first specimens of platypus ever to be seen outside Australia.
  It was sent to England in 1798  by Captain John Hunter, the Governor of New South Wales.
  This one small animal would take the scientific world by storm  and transform the careers and reputations  of some of the leading thinkers of the time.
  The platypus seemed to be a concoction of different animals,  part bird, with its bill, and part mammal, with its furry body.
  When Charles Darwin first encountered one in the wild, it baffled even him.
  "Surely, "he wrote, "two distinct creators must have been at work.
"  The task of describing the first platypus specimen fell to naturalist George Shaw,  who worked in the Department of Natural History in the British Museum,  and he viewed this remarkable specimen with a fair degree of caution.
  This is a first edition of a journal called A Naturalist's Miscellany,  which was published a few years after his examination,  and it contains not only an article by him  but a nice picture of the animal concerned,  and at the end he says, "On a subject so extraordinary as the present,  "a degree of scepticism is not only pardonable but laudable,  "and I ought perhaps to acknowledge that I almost doubt the testimony of my own eyes,  "with respect to the structure of this animal's beak.
"  It's said that Shaw was so determined to make sure  that he was not a victim of some elaborate hoax,  that he actually cut behind the bill  to make sure it hadn't been sewn on by some mischievous forger.
  In the late 18th century, the world was opening up.
  Travellers were returning from overseas with all kinds of wonders.
  Among them were specimens of creatures  that people had come to think of as being myths,  such as mermen and mermaids.
  These were, of course, hoaxes put together with parts from different animals.
  So, it's understandable that Shaw had doubts  about the authenticity of his new furry specimen.
  Despite his misgivings, he decided to give it a scientific name,  platypus, which means "flat-footed".
  He didn't know, however, that a beetle had already been given this name,  and some years later another taxonomist very properly gave it a new one,  ornithorhynchus, which means "bird snout".
  But platypus is still the name that most people use.
  But what type of creature was it?  George Shaw believed it to be a mammal because of its furry body.
  "All mammals feed on milk during the first part of their lives,  "milk that is produced by their mother's mammary glands.
"  But could an animal with a large, flat bill really suckle?  Some scientists thought that was impossible,  and, anyway, they couldn't believe  the platypus and the monkey could belong to the same group of animals.
  But that view was to change.
  Some 30 years after George Shaw described the platypus,  a German naturalist, Johann Meckel,  produced this wonderful collection of anatomical studies.
  Meckel's meticulous and detailed work  would help identify the true nature of this animal.
  Here  we can see his drawing of a male platypus,  showing, clearly, the claw.
  Meckel also reported the existence of simple glands  beneath the thick fur of the female platypus,  glands that he suggested secreted milk.
  There could be little doubt that these glands produced something,  but even then several scientists doubted Meckel's claims  and suggested, rather desperately,  that the glands secreted not milk but a lubricant.
  Today we know that Meckel was right,  and I was once able to use an optical probe to peer into a platypus's burrow  and see a female platypus nurturing her single baby.
  Yes, and there it is.
  It's milk.
  Milk is the perfect food.
  It provides the growing youngster with everything it wants,  and only mammals produce milk.
  In most mammals, of course, it comes from a nipple,  but in this very primitive mammal it simply oozes through the skin.
  But 19th-century biologists had no such tricks to help them.
  They had to unravel the strange biology of Australian mammals  from just a few shrivelled remains of long-dead specimens.
  40 years after their discovery of the platypus,  a brilliant young anatomist, who was to become a giant of 19th-century science,  joined the debate.
  This is a statue of Richard Owen.
  Owen was a formidable man,  the founding director of the Natural History Museum in Britain.
  He was once described as having so much brain as to require two hats.
  The platypus would become a central character in Owen's career.
  His work on this small creature  would help him secure election to the prestigious Royal Society,  an exclusive group of scientists and thinkers.
  Owen had an advantage over his European colleagues.
  Australia was a British colony  and Owen used his contacts to supply him with specimens.
  Eventually, two baby platypuses arrived  and it was obvious to him that they would have no difficulty in suckling.
  They had not yet developed the bill that would have made it awkward.
  So, he accepted that platypus babies, like other mammal babies,  were indeed raised on milk.
  But the biggest mystery of the platypus was still unsolved.
  Did this animal lay eggs, just like reptiles or birds,  or did it give birth to live young?  Owen was at the heart of that debate.
  These jars contain the bodies of several platypus that were shot  and sent back here to the museum for Richard Owen to examine.
  His determination to prove whether or not they laid eggs  was going to cause the death of quite a number of platypus.
  The Australian Aborigines were absolutely clear they did lay eggs,  but that was not good enough for Owen.
  He knew better than any Australian Aboriginal.
  He did concede that it might be that the eggs were retained inside the body  and hatched there so that the young were born live,  but that's as far as he would go.
  Eggs were also sent back.
  Some of them were fake and some of them belonged to snakes.
  It was going to be some decades before the puzzle of the platypus was finally solved.
  The platypus now became embroiled  in the greatest scientific debate of the Victorian era.
  Did species evolve or were they created?  Darwin's theory of evolution suggested that species could change over time,  so an intermediate form that laid eggs but had fur like a mammal was to be expected.
  But that was too much of a stretch even for Owen's great brain.
  In 1884, more than 80 years  after this first platypus specimen had been examined by George Shaw,  William Hay Caldwell arrived in Australia, funded by a Royal Society scholarship.
  One of his main aims was to solve the platypus egg question once and for all.
  After several months in Queensland and with the help of the local Aborigines,  he finally got the answer.
  He shot a female platypus soon after she had laid an egg in her nest burrow,  with a second egg about to emerge from her vent,  and they looked like this.
  It was, at last, visible evidence that this animal did indeed lay eggs.
  He sent a telegram to a scientific gathering in Montreal.
  It was brief and to the point.
  "Monotremes oviparous, ovum meroblastic.
"  These four words, to the scientifically initiated,  meant that the platypus laid eggs  and that the eggs consisted of an undivided large yolk,  just like a bird's egg.
  The mystery was at last solved.
  Richard Owen, who had refused to believe a mammal could lay an egg,  was by now 80 years old,  and he was no longer held in the same esteem as in the early part of his career.
  The platypus had helped to establish his reputation,  but now the riddle of this creature's reproduction had proved him wrong.
  It's extraordinary to think that this small animal fooled and confounded  many of the great scientific minds of 19th-century Europe,  not a hoax but a true curiosity, and one like no other.
  The egg-laying platypus was hardly believable to Victorian researchers.
  But evolution has thrown up many unusual mating strategies,  and in the early part of the 20th century,  the anatomy of a particular amphibian started an argument  that, like the platypus, led to accusations of forgery.
  This is the curious tale of the midwife toad.
  Midwife toads are not native to Britain.
  They were introduced about a century ago  and since then have been slowly spreading over England.
  Their natural home is Europe, from Germany to Spain,  and in the 1920s, their mating habits caused a media sensation.
  Investigations into the way the body of the male toad  changed according to its environment  led some to believe it might be possible to breed a race of superhumans.
  To understand why, we must first know  what makes the midwife toad so different from any other frog or toad.
  Amphibians were among the first backboned animals to take to the land.
  Since then, they have colonised most habitats,  from rain forests to deserts and mountains.
  Despite spending much of their lives on land,  most frogs and toads need water to reproduce,  whether it be in a small vase plant or a large lake.
  But mating in water is a slippery business.
  Male toads, however, have a special adaptation,  black warty swellings on their wrists called nuptial pads,  which enable them to grip their partner securely during sex.
  Once the female produces her eggs, the male releases his sperm and then lets go.
  His job is done.
  But midwife toads are different.
  The male does not have nuptial pads on his wrists.
  And that's because he doesn't mate in water.
 He mates on land.
  The female produces her eggs and then he takes them around his legs,  with an action that's been compared  to a man trying to put on his trousers without using his hands.
  So, it is the male toad that is the actual midwife, not the female.
  Midwife toads tend to live in places where open water is scarce.
  Once the male has successfully wrapped a string of eggs around his legs,  he usually hides under a rock, where it's suitably damp.
  He may have as many as 150 eggs  and he hides away for up to two months while they develop.
  Then, just before the eggs hatch,  he sets off to find water for his emerging tadpoles.
  Now, the tadpoles of most frogs and toads  turn into the adult form within a matter of weeks.
  But not so the midwife toad.
 It takes much, much longer.
  In fact, sometimes, they may even overwinter in the form of a tadpole,  which is why perhaps midwife toad tadpoles are such whoppers.
  Frogs and toads are widely used in biological studies  because they are easy to keep  and the different stages of their life cycles are easy to observe.
  So, it's no surprise that the unusual behaviour of the midwife toad  should attract the attention of many biologists.
  One was an Austrian scientist called Paul Kammerer,  who worked in Vienna in the early part of the 20th century,  and his discoveries quickly brought him great fame.
  But the toad would become a curse that would haunt him until the end of his life.
  Kammerer was greatly influenced  by the great French zoologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck,  who in 1799 published his theory  that characteristics acquired by an animal during its life  could be inherited by its offspring,  that a giraffe, for example, reaching upwards  to nibble the topmost shoots of trees,  would, over time, lengthen its neck muscles  and that this increase would then be inherited by its offspring,  and so on for generation after generation.
  Lamarck's theory was largely rejected  after Charles Darwin proposed a different mechanism for evolution,  based on changes to an animal's genetic make-up.
  Kammerer was keen to prove that Lamarck was right, after all.
  But giraffes are not the ideal experimental animal,  so he needed one he could keep in a lab and that would reproduce quickly,  and his attention fell on the midwife toad.
  Kammerer became fascinated  with the unusual nature of the midwife toad's reproduction.
  Why did males, like this one, carry eggs around his legs,  and could this be changed?  He wondered if their biology might be related to their natural environment,  which is largely arid.
  Kammerer decided to see what would happen if he kept the toads  in a warm, humid tank with access to pools of cool water.
  His work with the toads would last many years and involve several generations,  but eventually he noticed changes.
  Some male toads abandoned carrying the eggs  and instead the females laid them directly in water.
  Over several generations,  Kammerer had managed to change the midwife toad  from being a land-breeding animal to one that bred in water.
  But the most extraordinary discovery came as he continued breeding these toads.
  He noticed that the wrists of some of the males developed warty-looking structures,  just like the nuptial pads of other frogs and toads,  which are normally used by males to grip females when fertilising her eggs.
  His work suggested that somehow,  by altering the environment in which they lived,  a toad's body could be changed  and that change was then passed on to future generations.
  Kammerer's work was taking place at the end of the First World War,  and political movements on the left and the right  were then keen to exploit scientific discoveries.
  Despite his subject being a small toad,  some saw an opportunity to extend his findings beyond the laboratory.
  He was hailed as a second Darwin in The New York Times.
  Some newspapers got carried away  and suggested that Kammerer's discoveries could apply to humans.
  His work could help, in other words, to breed a race of superhumans.
  Whether he liked it or not, Kammerer was now in the spotlight.
  He set off on a lecture tour across Europe and America.
  In Cambridge, the Professor of Zoology hailed his achievements  and put one of Kammerer's toads on display.
  But not everyone was convinced.
  An American zoologist by the name of GK Noble  wrote a damning article in the prestigious scientific journal Nature.
  Noble examined one of Kammerer's toads  and declared that its black nuptial pads were fakes,  produced by injecting a black dye.
  Kammerer denied this.
  Someone, he said, had interfered with his specimens and was trying to ruin him.
  But the damage to his name was done.
  Six weeks after the Nature article accusing him of forgery,  Kammerer wrote a letter to another leading scientific journal.
  This is an extract of what it said.
  "On the basis of this state of affairs, I dare not,  "although I myself have had no part  "in these falsifications of my prior specimens,  "any longer consider myself a proper man to accept your call.
  "I see that I am also not in a position to endure this wrecking of my life's work,  "and I hope I shall gather together enough courage and strength  "to put an end of my wrecked life tomorrow.
"  Soon after writing that letter,  he walked into the hills around his home and shot himself.
  Whether or not Kammerer's suicide  was purely down to the fallout from his midwife toad experiments  we can't be sure.
  There were many other problems in his personal life.
  But there can be little doubt  that the scandal surrounding his work would have weighed heavily on his mind.
  Since Kammerer's death,  a specimen of male midwife toad with nuptial pads has been found in the wild.
  Some scientists now believe  that environmental influences can change the way some genes behave,  and that these changes can indeed be passed on to the next generation.
  Perhaps midwife toads possess the gene to grow these structures,  but it's only switched on in certain situations.
  Does this prove Kammerer was right?  No-one has been able to repeat Kammerer's experiments with midwife toads,  so we don't know for sure if he falsified his findings,  or whether he had stumbled upon a quirk of inheritance ahead of its time  and beyond the understanding of scientists of his era.
  What is certain  is that the nature of how species inherit their characteristics  is more complex than he or others at the time originally thought.
  The curious lives of the midwife toad and the duck-billed platypus  perplexed and wrong-footed science for some considerable time.
  But in the end both these creatures helped us  to better understand the way animals evolve.
 
                    SIR DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: Some animals live extremely long lives,  but how does their skin help them on their journey to old age?  Curious questions like this have always fascinated me.
  I've had the good luck to meet some very interesting creatures,  but some are particularly unusual.
  We've known about some of these animals for centuries.
  Others we've discovered more recently.
  In this series, I unravel some of their stories  and reveal why they're considered natural curiosities.
  The elephant and the mole rat are curious creatures.
  They're both extremely wrinkled,  starting their young lives looking ancient and remaining that way into old age.
  Yet they outlive most other animals their size.
  What are their secrets?   Elephants are truly strange creatures, both in looks and behaviour.
  Aristotle described them as "the beast that passeth all others in wit and mind".
  But the more we learn about its curious body and behaviour,  the more remarkable it appears to be.
  The evolution of such a strange-looking creature is no accident.
  Its fascinating body is the key to allowing elephants to live a long life.
  For elephants, even young ones,  it's an advantage to be wrinkly and not at all a sign of old age.
  Elephants evolved from mammoths over 55 million years ago.
  Today, they're the heaviest land mammals alive  and one of the longest-lived, with a life expectancy of about 70 years.
  Big creatures usually live a long time,  largely because they have slow metabolisms.
  However, elephants have particular characteristics  that help them reach old age.
  One of the most important, a family structure  in which the oldest matriarchs pass on vital experience.
  And their bodies have developed some special features  to deal with the problems of being so big.
  Their trunk is one of them.
  This surely is the most extraordinary nose possessed by any living creature.
  It can be moved with ease and dexterity to gently caress,  tear down trees, suck up litres of water.
  The trunk is, in fact, a union between the nose and the upper lip  and it's highly sensitive, with over 100,000 muscle units in it.
  The end of the trunk can move rather like a hand.
  This mobile tip allows the elephant to feel and pick up delicate objects,  such as a single blade of grass.
  The stretched nose is a masterpiece of evolution  and key to how the elephant can survive with such a large and curious body.
  If they hadn't developed a trunk, elephants couldn't have become so big.
  It enables them, in spite of their huge, stocky body,  to reach down to the ground to collect food and water.
  Fuelling a big body is a full-time job,  and an elephant has to consume its own weight in food every 20 days.
  One might think this great weight would be a stress on joints and teeth,  and wear elephants out before old age,  but not so.
  Eating vegetation is, of course, very tough on the teeth,  and there are some animals  that, when their teeth are worn down, simply starve and die.
  But elephants can live to 70 years old,  and their secret lies in their extraordinary molar teeth.
  They have two pairs - two at the top, two at the bottom -  and here's one of them.
  This is the grinding surface  which is capable of shredding twigs and bark and even wood,  and, of course, it wears.
  But as it wears down, so another tooth is developing within the jaw,  which finally emerges and pushes this forward  until it actually breaks off and is shed.
  Acquiring new teeth in that way  enables elephants to remain well fed and healthy into old age.
  In elephant society, the older females are invaluable  and pass on the wisdom they've gained during their long lives  to younger members of the family.
  (RUMBLING GROWL)  Mature females spend long periods of time listening out for vital sounds of danger  and warn the group.
  (RUMBLING GROWL)  Such sensitivity to sound  was the subject of one of the very first animal behaviour experiments.
  Someone in France in the early 18th century  noted that elephants in menageries appeared to react  to faint, distant sounds outside their enclosures.
  So, they tested two elephants, Hans and Parkie,  and engaged a Paris orchestra to play love music to them.
  One elephant was very impressed by the French horn player.
  It was reported that, "The animal knelt down before him,  "caressed him with his trunk,  "and expressed to him in all sorts of pretty ways  "the pleasure which it had felt in listening to him.
"  We now know that the French horn can produce a low-frequency sound  that's very like the rumble that elephants produce,  using a similar resonating chamber in their heads.
  (RUMBLING GROWL)  They can also hear very deep sounds beyond our own hearing.
  The oldest experienced females are experts at interpreting them.
  Such frequencies create vibrations in the ground that travel a very long way,  which the elephants can detect through their feet.
  Their feet, in fact, are not as solid as they might look  but have special internal cushioning  to soften the impact of the animal's weighty footsteps.
  For such a large creature, that can be 40 times our weight,  this foot seems unfeasibly small.
  Its surface area is little more than twice our own feet,  but this foot has a surprising structure.
  The elephant walks on five toes,  and the back part of its foot consists of a highly spongy heel.
  The raised heel can compress and expand to absorb shock  and shield the other heavy bones in the body from pressure.
  It's as if the elephant were wearing a high-heeled training shoe.
  When an elephant runs, it bounces on this spongy heel,  and its leg bones act like pogo sticks to push the animal upwards.
  This system protects the bones and inner tissues,  and wild elephants rarely get arthritis.
  (SNARLING SHRIEK)  Despite their large size, they live active physical lives  without too much damage to their bodies.
  Males, as they mature, usually go off to live by themselves,  but the females stay with the family group  and play a very important part in guiding the younger ones.
  Young elephants tend to look old, even at the start of their lives,  because of their wrinkly skin.
  But for elephants, wrinkles are not signs of ageing.
  On the contrary, they're extremely important for an elephant's very survival.
  The elephant's thick, creased skin  has been the subject of much debate over the years,  and early anatomists had some novel ideas about it.
  Many believed that the elephant could actually move its skin  to crush flies between the wrinkles.
  I may say that was never witnessed in action.
  But the skin was thought to be enormously thick and insensitive,  but, in fact, it varies across the elephant's body  and can be as thick as two or three centimetres  around the top of its trunk and along the back,  and as thin as paper around the eyes.
  Although the skin looks tough and wrinkly, it's remarkably sensitive.
  An elephant can feel small flies on its body,  even if it can't crush them between its wrinkles.
  But these wrinkles really do have an important function.
  The patterned crevices hold water, which travels along them all over the body.
  Wrinkly skins can retain five to ten times more water than smooth ones,  so moisture collected during wallowing  stops the skin from dehydrating and overheating for a long time afterwards.
  Significantly, African elephants that live in hotter, drier places  have more deeply wrinkled skins than Asian elephants.
  So, wrinkles, for the elephant, are ways of protecting the skin,  not the unwanted consequence of old age.
  The elephant was once considered an oddity of nature.
  For centuries, we've been fascinated by their large ears,  their extraordinary trunks, the stocky feet, the wrinkly skins,  but over the years, we've come to understand their significance.
  The elephant's unique biology is key to its long-term survival  and its ability to seemingly avoid the rigours of old age.
  Elephants understandably live a long time  because of the slow metabolism of their huge bodies.
  (RUMBLING GROWL)  But small naked mole rats live much longer  than any other mammal of a comparable size.
  Why?  Could it be that the body of this bizarre little creature  holds the secret of eternal youth?  When a German naturalist, Wilhelm Rüppell,  discovered a lone, hairless, wrinkled naked mole rat in 1842 in Ethiopia,  he was convinced that he had stumbled across a decrepit old individual  and he gave it the name "Heterocephalus glaber",  which, loosely translated, means  a smooth-skinned animal with an oddly shaped head.
  He noted that the form of the body, because of its hairlessness,  gives an unpleasant impression.
  It does.
  For the next 40 years,  these bizarre-looking creatures were largely ignored by scientists.
  Then, in 1885,  a British zoologist in London's Natural History Museum called Oldfield Thomas  decided to examine in detail the museum's specimens  that had been sitting in store for decades.
  Here we can see some of his drawings.
  Thomas declared that the weird animal described by Rüppell was, in fact, normal.
  We now know that all mole rats look like this, whatever their age.
  However, what those earlier naturalists couldn't have known  was that they had chanced upon a mammal  that would fascinate and intrigue scientists for the next 150 years,  a creature that might even shed light on the secrets of ageing and longevity.
  Its body hardly seemed to alter, no matter how long it lived.
  Old mole rats stayed physically young throughout their lives.
  And, not only that - the strangest discovery of all  was that they sometimes lived for almost 30 years.
  The life span of animals varies enormously.
  Amongst mammals, a tiny little shrew like this lives just two or so years,  while a giant whale can reach the age of 100.
  Lifestyle is an important factor in defining life span.
  A shrew has a fast and furious life,  producing many young, of which few survive.
  Whales, on the other hand, breed slowly and don't have many predators.
  Generally, big animals live longer.
  So, it's very odd indeed that mole rats live up to nine times longer  than any other similar-sized rodent.
  Why?  In the 1960s, more than 100 years after their discovery,  scientists started keeping the animals in laboratories  to try and answer that question.
  The results were confusing.
  The mole rats lived in colonies, and only a few females ever reproduced.
  Around that time, an evolutionary biologist called Richard Alexander  was studying the way colonial insects, such as termites,  organised their colonies.
  They have a single breeding female  who produces huge numbers of non-breeding workers,  a system called eusociality.
  He speculated that, if there were such things as a eusocial mammal,  it too, like termites, would live underground in hard soil.
  He was right.
  The naked mole rat perfectly fits Alexander's description  of what a eusocial animal should be like.
  There it is.
  It lives underground in large social groups  and digs for tubers in exceptionally hard soil.
  Physically, it's evolved for a life below ground.
  It has a long, thin body with short legs that suit life in a tunnel.
  Its enlarged, strong teeth are used for digging.
  Its skull is strong, the head quite large,  lips closed behind its teeth to stop any soil going into its mouth.
  Also it's almost entirely bald, except for a few sensory hairs.
  Could it be that these extraordinary characteristics  have something to do with their ability to live very, very long lives?  They're certainly key to the mole rat's unusual life underground.
  The queen is at the heart of the colony.
  She mates with just two or three males  and produces babies in huge litters, sometimes of more than 20.
  The workers feed the queen, care for the young and guard the tunnels.
  Their role is essential.
  The colony would not survive if all its members didn't work together.
  The tubers that they eat are hard to find on the dry African plains,  and the workers have to dig miles of tunnels in their search for them.
  The fact that they don't breed might seem hard,  but their mother, the queen, does, and her DNA is virtually identical to theirs,  and, by working together,  the colony can live in places where an individual mole rat could not.
  But this still doesn't explain why these creatures live so long.
  More recently, another adaptation to life underground threw up a clue.
  Fossil records show that mole rats started living underground  about 24 million years ago.
  Not surprisingly, they're now highly adapted  to a life in dark and humid tunnels.
  Conditions in a sealed, two-metre-deep tunnel system don't fluctuate greatly,  and, maybe because of this,  mole rats have lost the ability to regulate their own body temperature.
  So, to prevent getting chilled, they huddle together in groups.
  They also, like reptiles, absorb heat  by basking in the warmer shallow surface tunnels.
  Being hairless might be an advantage for an animal that's essentially cold-blooded  and needs to get some of its heat from its surrounding,  and that may explain why naked mole rats are virtually bald.
  But why are not other warm-blooded mammals that live underground also bald?  Badgers, for example, have hairy coats.
  (GROWLS)  Well, badgers come above ground to feed  and then they need their hairy coats to keep warm.
  Naked mole rats, on the other hand, never see the light of day.
  Nonetheless, one might think  that being soft-skinned and bald is a huge disadvantage,  for mole rats live in stuffy, insanitary conditions.
  Mole rats colonies can contain several hundred individuals,  and conditions underground are dark and dank and often quite toxic.
  Oxygen levels can be very low and carbon dioxide high.
  Yet, mysteriously, mole rats show no discomfort  and suffer very little from disease.
  This tolerance to such hostile conditions  may also be related to their strange wrinkled skin and the cells below it.
  Apparently, they lack a key neurotransmitter, called substance P,  that is normally responsible for sending pain signals  to the central nervous system.
  This may explain their ability to survive the toxic conditions underground  without stress and damage to their bodies.
  It could also be one of the secrets  of their youthful appearance, if you can call it that, and even their longevity.
  Most animals react strongly to pain, and this can damage their bodies.
  In mole rats, this effect is eliminated by cutting out the pain response.
  Incredibly, no mole rat has ever been found with cancer.
  But even if a normal animal survives disease, it still ages.
  This is largely due to other chemicals in the body called oxidising agents.
  They build up with time and break down the body tissues.
  This leads to the telltale signs of old age.
  Incredibly, mole rats appear to have no physical reaction  to high levels of oxidising agents.
  They grow very old, yet they don't physically age.
  In wild mole rats, the queen is the most long-lived,  and one of them here is 24 years old,  yet she still has the body of a two-year-old.
  No-one is sure how mole rats avoid the symptoms of old age,  but a unique physiology evolved in response to the underground life  has created an animal that is almost supernatural.
  Here's a creature that's seemingly impervious to pain  and with an iron constitution.
  It's virtually cold-blooded, with a slow metabolism,  and has evolved an unusual mix of strategies  to deal with its challenging lifestyle.
  In the future, these remarkable animals  may help us solve some of our own problems,  such as pain control, degenerative disease,  and how we might avoid old age and wrinkly skins.
  Here is a natural curiosity that is well worth pursuing.
  Both elephants and mole rats remain much the same as they grow old.
  And, surprisingly, the small naked mole rat  lives, relatively speaking, even longer than the elephant.
 
                    SIR DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: Nature has twisted the tusk of the narwhal  and the shells of snails and their relatives.
  But what is the purpose of the twist?  I've met many fascinating animals in my time,  but there are those I find particularly intriguing.
  Some are very familiar- we've known them for centuries.
  Others have been discovered only recently.
  But all of them raise interesting questions,  and in this series, I try to find some of the answers.
   Spirals are common in the natural world.
  We seldom pay attention to them.
  But, in fact, they have remarkable characteristics  which many animals exploit.
  And some creatures, having developed a spiral,  have re-worked it in many intriguing and beautiful ways.
  In this programme, I'll try to discover why the spiral  is so important to two very different kinds of animals.
  The narwhal lives in the cold waters of the Arctic sea.
  It's rarely seen and little is known about its life, even today.
  But 400 years ago, it was the source of myths and tall tales  that fooled everyone, including the royal households of Europe.
  These tapestries hanging in Stirling Castle are modern,  but they are accurate copies of medieval originals.
  And they show several images  of that most wonderful creature, the unicorn.
  In the Middle Ages, the unicorn was thought to be a real animal  and, what's more, one with magical powers.
  So the King of Scotland incorporated one in his coat of arms,  and that in due course was inherited by the British coat of arms  and shown sitting opposite the English lion.
  During the Middle Ages, it was believed that a unicorn horn  could detect poison and neutralise it.
  So it's not surprising that most of the kings of Europe  wanted one of these wonderful and powerful objects.
  Such treasures, however, weren't easy to come by.
  But in the 16th century, an English seaman accidentally discovered one.
  In 1576, Martin Frobisher sailed across the North Atlantic  in search of a sea route to connect the Atlantic with the Pacific,  and when he reached the chilly coast of Northern Canada  he found, lying on the seashore, a "unicorn's horn".
  He brought it back to Britain and soon found a buyer-  Elizabeth I.
  This is very like the object  that Sir Martin Frobisher presented to Queen Elizabeth.
  It's said that she paid £10,000 for it.
  In today's money, that's about half a million or more.
  Weight for weight, "unicorn horn" was worth more than gold.
  But the object was not what Queen Elizabeth supposed it to be.
  It was not the horn of a mythical animal,  it was the tusk of a kind of whale that swam in the Arctic seas -  the narwhal.
  The first examples were brought south by the Vikings.
  They almost certainly knew exactly what its origin was,  but for 400 years, they maintained the story  that it came from the mythical unicorn.
  But further south in Europe, no-one knew about narwhals,  and scholarly natural history books confidently described unicorns in detail,  as if they were real.
  Since unicorn horns were hard to come by,  unscrupulous dealers met the demand by grinding up rhinoceros horn.
  In fact, the horn of a rhino and a narwhal could hardly be more different.
  You can see from this narwhal skull  the hole where the horn would normally sit.
  It grows outwards through the lip.
  But whereas rhino horn is actually made of keratin,  the same stuff as our fingernails are made of,  the narwhal's great horn is actually made largely of dentine.
  It's not a horn at all,  it's an enormous canine tooth - a tusk.
  Some female narwhals possess tusks, but by and large,  male narwhals grow the long tusks,  which can reach three metres in length.
  It's been described as a cross between a corkscrew  and a jousting lance.
  But its true purpose has baffled scientists for centuries.
  Very few creatures have tusks.
  The most well-known, of course, are elephants.
  Their tusks are in fact enlarged incisor teeth.
  Both male and female elephants develop them  and they're used in many ways, but primarily for getting food,  digging into the ground, ripping up grass or pushing over trees.
  The obvious difference between elephant and narwhal tusks  is that the narwhal possesses just one  whereas the elephant has two,  but that may not always have been the case.
  This is a rare curiosity indeed.
  It's the skull of a narwhal with two tusks.
  It's possible that such a rarity offers a window on the past.
  Perhaps the ancient ancestors of the narwhals were once twin-tusked,  but over time they lost one.
  But what was it for?  One early suggestion was that the narwhal used it to spear fish,  though how it would manage to transfer its catch  from the end of its tusk to its mouth was never explained.
  Someone else suggested that the animal  used its horn to stab holes through the Arctic ice.
  That's not unreasonable, since narwhals spend a lot of time under ice  and, being mammals, they have to get to air in order to breathe.
  But it seemed strange that only males have a tusk.
  After all, females need to breathe, too.
  Charles Darwin had another explanation.
  He likened the tusk to the antlers carried by male deer, stags.
  Antlers help stags to establish hierarchies during the mating season.
  The stag with the biggest antlers asserts his dominance  by showing them off and occasionally fighting with them.
  Darwin proposed that the long tusk of the narwhal  functioned in just the same way -  as a declaration of dominance and, if necessary, as a weapon.
  That would explain why male narwhals possess the long tusks.
  And why, when males meet, they sometimes cross tusks  in what might be a ritualised form of combat.
  Darwin's theory has long been accepted,  but recently, scientists have been exploring other possibilities.
  Our teeth are covered with a thick enamel layer  that protects the softer material beneath.
  If that erodes or is damaged, then it exposes the nerves  within the tooth, which can make them extremely sensitive to temperature.
  Narwhal tusks don't possess that external enamel covering,  and high-magnification photography has revealed something very unusual  about the exterior surface of this huge, elongated tooth.
  The surface of the tusk is cratered  with millions of tiny pits, called tubules.
  Each tubule contains a fluid and, at its base, a nerve.
  The fluid reacts to the narwhal's environment,  so the tusk must be highly sensitive.
  Tests on narwhals have shown that they can detect  tiny changes in the temperature and salinity of water,  key factors that govern the formation of ice.
  Their migration is tied to the seasonal shrinking  and expanding of the ice cap.
  So perhaps the tusk plays a role in detecting ice or open water.
  But its sensory powers could be even greater.
  Perhaps the tusk is able to detect movement in the water,  or even changes in the fertility of female narwhals.
  These are theories yet to be tested.
  If this is a sensory tool,  then it would put a very different interpretation on the male jousting.
  Perhaps males enjoy rubbing their tusks together.
  There could be a third explanation, a more practical one.
  Tusks from old narwhals often become coated with algae  which might block the pores that lead to the nerves.
  So, perhaps males rub their tusks together to help clean them.
  Could this be not fighting but co-operative grooming?  Why mainly male narwhals carry a sensory tool is still unexplained.
  Rather than being a weapon, perhaps the highly sensitive tusk  helps males to find female partners.
  More than likely, the tusk serves many functions,  but why should it be twisted?  The twist increases the surface area  so it's possible more nerve endings are exposed  and this would increase its sensitivity.
  There's another theory that suggests  that the twist actually helps to keep the tusk straight.
  That may sound counter-intuitive,  but tusks of other large animals tend to curve down or up.
  A spiral growth may actually help the tusk to keep pointing forwards  and so reduce drag in the water.
  There's another way in which the twist could help in swimming.
  As the animal moves forward,  the water around the tusk spirals away from it in a way that might reduce drag.
  But at least today we know the true identity of the animals  that produce these wonderful and spectacular ivory spears.
  The myth that they came from the unicorn was finally exploded in 1638  by a Danish scientist, Ole Wurm, who gave a public lecture  proving conclusively that they came from the narwhal.
  So then, of course, their value plummeted.
  Today, we no longer believe they have magical properties,  but there's still quite a lot about them we don't fully understand.
  Our second subject belongs to a group of animals  that have taken the spiral and adapted it into a multitude of variations -  snails.
  When the first snails crawled out of the sea and up on to dry land,  they carried with them the shells  that were to be crucial to their survival out of water.
  They themselves were distant relatives of other shelled creatures  that had dominated the seas for millions of years.
  They were the ammonites.
  This is one of them, and this is about 160 million years old.
  Although they experimented to some degree with the shape of the shell,  nearly all of them are like this -  flat, spiral and symmetrical.
  In due course, the ammonites themselves became extinct,  but since then, other creatures have developed the shell  into a whole variety of different shapes and sizes.
  This variety shows how successful the spiral can be  as the basis for a shell's design   and how it can be elaborated and decorated.
  Snail shells, like the shells of birds' eggs,  are made of calcium carbonate.
  They appear at the very beginning of a young snail's life  and they are never shed, but simply become enlarged as the animal grows.
  But whatever their shape and size, they're almost always spiralled.
  Spirals have been used by animals for a very long time.
  We can trace them back to a group of sea creatures  that first appeared around 500 million years ago,  and some are still around today.
  This is one - the nautilus.
  Today, it's only found in the deep waters of the Indo-Pacific Ocean,  but millions of years ago, animals like it were widespread.
  Its earliest ancestors, however, had a very different shape.
  There's evidence that the nautiloids started out more or less straight,  like this one, just a little curl at the beginning  and then running straight like that,  with the separate chambers running along there.
  But as millions of years passed, they began to coil,  until they became species like this one.
  And then, millions of years later,  another group adopted the symmetrical coil.
  These were called ammonites.
  But why did these animals coil their shells?  Well, if their shells remained straight as they increased in size,  they would inevitably become somewhat cumbersome.
  Coiling them made them more compact and perhaps more mobile.
  Whatever the reason, the change in shell shape was a great success.
  Thousands of new species appeared, all with coiled shells.
  These fossilised shells tell us little  about the soft-bodied creatures that lived in them,  but the living nautilus can give us some clues about that.
  At the start of its life, the shell consists of just a few chambers  but by the time it's mature, there may be as many as 30.
  Richard Owen, the founding director of London's Natural History Museum,  wrote the first full description of the nautilus.
  This is Owen's own personal copy, and it's full of exquisite sketches.
  His drawings show just how the animal is placed inside a shell.
  Almost all the soft tissues of its body and tentacles  are held in the outermost chamber,  and a long tube called a siphuncle runs through the chambers  through which the animal can pump in water or remove it,  and so regulates its buoyancy.
  So, the nautilus' spiral shell not only protects its soft body from enemies,  but enables it to cruise around,  and it's so strong that the nautilus can descend as deep as 700 metres,  where pressure would kill a human being.
  At the peak of their success,  there were thousands of different kinds of nautiloids,  but their cousins, the ammonites, were even more varied and diverse.
  Their buoyant shells allowed some of these creatures  to grow to a huge size.
  Some were as big as a human being.
  But it would be impossible for such a creature  to move out of water with a shell like this.
  It would be far too heavy and too cumbersome.
  Nonetheless, something was about to happen to the molluscs  that would allow them to leave the water and move up onto land.
  The ammonite dynasties were developing different shapes to their shells,  uncoiling them in all sorts of ways.
  Some of these new forms fed on the sea floor,  and therefore had less need to be mobile.
  But other shelled relatives of the ammonites were going even further,  changing both their shell shape and twisting their soft bodies.
  And these are their descendants - snails.
  The problem with a symmetrical shell  is that each whorl has to grow on the outside of the other one,  so that the shell very quickly becomes very big.
  But by coming asymmetrical and offsetting each whorl to the side,  the shell can remain much more compact and rounded and easier to manipulate.
  The shift in the snail's symmetry  seems to have been triggered by the action of a single gene.
  But this change can bring complications.
  Because of their asymmetric shape,  snails have to position themselves carefully during mating.
  In most snails, this is not a problem,  as the body plan of snails is usually the same.
  But not all.
  Just like humans who are either right-handed or left-handed,  snail shells can twist to the left  or the right.
  The vast majority of snail shells are right-spiralling,  but in one particular area of Japan,  the left-handed form of this particular species has a clear advantage.
  That is all because of this creature - a snail-eating snake.
  It's so specialised for eating snails that its jaws have evolved  to become asymmetrical, just like its prey.
  The right side of its lower jaw has more teeth than the left.
  Recently, scientists in Japan filmed the hunting behaviour of this snake.
  When it attacks a snail with a right-spiralled shell,  its row of extra teeth dig into the snail's flesh  and, by moving its jaws back and forth,  it separates the snail's body from its shell.
  But attacking a snail with a left-spiralled shell  is not so straightforward.
  The position of the shell means that  the snake can't use its specialised jaws so effectively and it gives up.
  Shells help land-living snails to conserve moisture  and also protect them from their enemies.
  The snails' soft bodies are, of course,  welcome meals to any predator that can crack their shells.
  Some snails have strengthened their shells.
  Some have protected them with spines.
  Others have become very thick indeed, and almost uncrackable.
  Some scientists believe that this could be the golden age of the snail.
  They've never been more diverse in terms of species  or indeed the variety of their shells.
  But while the snails are more varied,  that is not the case with the nautilus.
  The oceans were once dominated by creatures like this,  and today, just a handful of different types exist.
  While snails have taken the spiral and modified it endlessly,  the modern nautilus has stuck with a symmetrical spiral  that's hardly changed for hundreds of millions of years.
  So, it's fair to say that the nautilus shell  is a window on the distant past, to a time when the simple,  but symmetrical spiral dominated the seas.
  So, both whales and snails have benefited from the twist,  a design that first appeared 500 million years ago  and is still widespread today.
 
                    SIR DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: Why do some animals advertise themselves  with bold patterns or dazzling colours?  I've been lucky enough, one way or another,  to meet some of our planet's most enchanting animals,  but some I find particularly intriguing.
  We've known about some of these creatures for centuries.
  Others we've discovered more recently.
  In this series, I share their stories  and reveal why they really are natural curiosities.
   The natural world is full of colours and patterns.
  For most of us, many animals are simply beautiful,  sometimes so beautiful they become highly collectable.
  But what role do colours and patterns play  in the lives of the animals that display them?  The zebra has stripes unlike any other mammal.
  When they first became widely known outside Africa during the 18th century,  they were much-prized pets in menageries of the nobility and royalty.
  But while they fascinated the public, they baffled scientists.
  What on earth could be the function of these extraordinary stripes?  Well, the answers that have been suggested over the centuries  have been truly astounding.
  To begin with, all that was known about zebras was that  they lived in herds on the vast plains of Africa.
  But, as zebras became more familiar to European society,  we began to learn more.
  One particular zebra  became something of a celebrity in Georgian England,  so much so that it was painted  by the famous racehorse painter George Stubbs.
  This is a copy of his picture.
  It was a belated wedding present to Queen Charlotte  from her husband, King George III,  and it actually lived in the grounds of Buckingham House,  as Buckingham Palace was then known.
  Queen Charlotte was a passionate collector of exotic animals,  and the zebra soon became the most famous animal in her collection,  attracting crowds of visitors.
  Georgian London was not unfamiliar with bizarre and exotic creatures -  many curiosities were being sent back from the expanding British Empire.
  But the strange striped horse was particularly intriguing.
  Early zebra collectors, in trying to tame them,  stumbled upon one possible reason for their stripes.
  Queen Charlotte wasn't the only famous European  to be fanatical about zebras.
  So was this gentleman, Lord Olive of India -  the British Army officer who established British interest there  in the 18th century.
  He actually owned two, a male and a female,  and so keen was he to try and get a zebra that would be tameable,  he tried to mate his female zebra with a male donkey.
  And to make the male donkey more attractive to the female,  believe it or not, he painted it with stripes -  and the experiment was a success.
  In due course, the female zebra produced a foal.
  As this old newsreel shows,  the offspring of such unions are partially striped.
  They're also sometimes fertile.
  Lord Clive's success in producing one  might suggest that the stripes are indeed important  in making one partner attractive to the other.
  Charles Darwin built on that idea.
  He noticed that each individual zebra had its own unique stripe pattern.
  He suggested that the stripes were a way  for individuals to recognise each other during courtship.
  Occasionally, however, a zebra appeared  with a coat pattern so odd that it challenged that explanation.
  In 1968, a picture of a very strange zebra appeared in the press.
  It's fair to say that this animal is dotted, rather than striped,  and that could give us an insight into the function of its coat patterns.
  If it's to do with social cohesion,  then you would expect that such a strange creature  would be shunned by the rest of the herd,  but that was not so - it was treated just like any other member.
  So, maybe its coat patterns are not primarily to do with social cohesion.
  Other theories suggest the stripes play an important role  in defence against predators.
  But how?  It's been claimed that the moving striped bodies of a herd of zebras  confuse a lion, making it difficult for it to judge distance,  and so time its pounce.
  Others have argued that the stripes break up the zebras' outlines,  so that they're hard to spot, especially among vegetation.
  However, research comparing the zebra and the tiger concluded that,  while a tiger's stripes makes it blend with its background, at least to our eyes,  the regular spacing of the zebra's stripes actually make it more conspicuous.
  The bold stripes of Queen Charlotte's zebra  drew huge crowds to Buckingham Palace,  but the animal itself was proving to be quite a handful.
  The Queen's lone pet was a somewhat temperamental animal,  and its keepers had to warn spectators that it was likely to kick and bite.
  And that's hardly surprising,  bearing in mind the strange food it was given,  which was a mixture of raw meat and tobacco -  hardly the sort of thing to give to a grazing animal.
  It also became a way of lampooning the royal family.
  The animal itself was known as the Queen's Ass,  and its stripes were used to indicate the King and Queen's son, Prince George.
  The Victorians continued the Georgian obsession with taming zebras,  but they had a practical reason for doing so.
  A reason that may provide another explanation for the stripes.
  Flies.
  Flies carry fatal diseases that affect both humans and cattle,  and one of the most dangerous in Africa is the tsetse fly.
  It spreads a disease called sleeping sickness  that kills people, cattle and horses.
  Early Victorian settlers noticed that, while their domestic horses  fell ill from sleeping sickness, zebras were not affected.
  So they set about taming them.
  Over the years, many people have attempted to tame zebras,  but the efforts of one Victorian eccentric were particularly spectacular.
  These zebras were once part of a menagerie of a Victorian aristocrat  who became obsessed with taming them.
  Walter Rothschild was a member of the great Rothschild banking family,  but he wasn't much good as a banker.
  His main passion was for wildlife.
  And he had a particular fondness of zebras,  and spent a great deal of time and effort training them.
  Rothschild succeeded where others failed.
  This extraordinary photograph shows him on a journey to Buckingham Palace,  with his carriage being drawn by tame zebras.
  It was a time-consuming process.
  He trained each zebra individually, using a small carriage.
  And they didn't take easily to being bridled,  but eventually all three of his zebras, and a pony,  pulled his carriage all the way through London to Buckingham Palace.
  It must have been a strange spectacle to anybody passing by,  but perhaps they didn't notice the zebras.
  Walter's brother Charles remarked that the stripes of the zebra  made them almost disappear as they travelled through the city streets.
  Despite Rothschild's efforts, zebras never really became  an alternative to the horse, in England or in Africa.
  The observation by those early settlers,  that zebras seemed immune to the bites of tsetse flies,  was not entirely correct.
  Zebras can be bitten by flies  and can suffer the same sickness as the domestic horse.
  But, nonetheless, evidence suggests they attract fewer flies.
  Some scientists have theorised that the zebra's stripes may in some way  make it more difficult for biting flies to land on a zebra's body.
  To test this theory, a number of Hungarian scientists  took four horse-shaped models.
  One they painted black, another they painted brown,  the third was white and the fourth was painted with the stripes of a zebra.
  Then they put these four models in a field  and covered them with sticky glue.
  Then, after a certain length of time,  they went and counted the number of flies that had landed on the different bodies  And believe it or not, there were fewest flies on the zebra's body.
  How could this be?  Well, an insect's eyes are compound - they have a lot of elements in them -  and they navigate using horizontally polarised light.
  And it may be that the stripes of the zebra  in some way disrupt that polarised light  and make it much more difficult for the flies to land on the zebra's body.
  These recent findings  do not prove definitively why zebras got their stripes.
  There could be several other benefits.
  But they do suggest that the stripes are more about avoiding being bitten,  rather than avoiding being eaten.
  Whatever the biological reason for its stripes,  zebras have fascinated us for centuries.
  Queen Charlotte was so besotted by hers that eventually she bought another.
  The first had proved to be so ill-tempered  that she sold it to a friend of King George III.
  From there, it went to a travelling menagerie,  and when it died its body was stuffed and put on display  in the Blue Boar Inn in York -  something of a comedown from the grounds of Buckingham House.
  The zebra has taken a basic striped pattern and stuck with it.
  Our second patterned animal has done quite the opposite  and has produced thousands, if not millions, of variations on a theme.
  Victorian naturalists seem to have been obsessed with butterflies,  their assembled specimens fill the cabinets of many a museum.
  London's Natural History Museum has over three million of them alone.
  And it's easy to see why those naturalists were so obsessed.
  Butterflies are so astonishingly varied and stunningly beautiful.
  When it comes to pattern,  nature seems to have excelled herself with the butterfly wing.
  Why nature has refashioned the wing into so many different patterns  has long fascinated science.
  The vast majority of the specimens here come from the Victorian era,  a period when a passion for amateur collecting reached its peak.
  Many of those early collectors recognised the relationship  between the colour and pattern of a butterfly's wing  and its identity as a species.
  Each species has its own signature pattern and hue.
  Magnifying a wing shows how these patterns are created.
  The surface is covered with millions of tiny scales.
  They're made of chitin  and contain different pigments that tend to fade.
  But there is another kind of wing colouration  that gives some butterflies a particular, spectacular brilliance,  and this remains long after the butterfly is dead.
  These Morpho butterflies were collected over 100 years ago  and they are as bright today as the day on which they were collected.
  That is because their wings contain  tiny microscopic structures called gyroids.
  When the light hits one of them, it is bent and refracted,  so that the colour it produces  varies according to the angle on which you look at it.
  The gyroid, in fact, is not a pigment, which would fade -  it's a crystal structure.
  Darwin pondered on the reason for such bright colours.
  They could, after all, make the butterfly highly visible to predators.
  So, why be so colourful?  Victorian naturalists were aware that male and female butterflies  of the same species could be very different in colour.
  The male Large Blue is, indeed, blue,  but the female, on the other hand, is a drab brown.
  For Darwin, such species were a perfect example  of a process he called "sexual selection".
  A colour or pattern arises among males that is attractive to the opposite sex,  so the most brightly-coloured male is more likely to get a mate.
  Remarkably, it's sometimes possible to see the male colouration  and female colouration in a single, individual butterfly,  like this one.
  That side is female, and that's male.
  Such individuals are called gynandromorphs  and they're extremely rare.
  They're also infertile,  but, nonetheless, they can reveal a great deal  about sex and colouration in butterflies.
  Studying the genetics of gynadromorphs  has enabled scientists to understand the role male and female genes play  in the development of wing colour and shape.
  But why should it be the females who are drab  and the males more colourful?  That's because, in such species, males are territorial  and bright colours visible from a distance keep other males away.
  The females, on the other hand, are egg layers,  and it's often better for them to be less conspicuous.
  But not all butterflies show such clear differences between the sexes.
  I once visited the winter home of the Monarch butterfly in Mexico.
  Here, tens of millions of butterflies,  having left North America to escape the winter,  cluster together on trees.
  Males and females are hardly any different.
  Both are bright orange, with black stripes.
  It's a magnificent spectacle,  and one might think that, with all these butterflies in one place,  they would be a feast for predators.
  But, remarkably,  few animals are able to eat Monarch butterflies,  because they are poisonous.
  Today, our understanding of wing pattern  and colour as a means of defence is largely due to the work  of one of those impressive, Victorian butterfly collectors.
  In 1848, a young British naturalist called Henry Bates  began a collecting expedition to the Amazon  that would continue for 11 years.
  Bates was of humble origin and largely self-educated,  so he was rather different from other scholars of the time.
  He travelled to the Amazon with fellow naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace,  who wrote that the aim of their journey wasn't just to collect,  but to "gather facts towards solving the problem of the origin of species.
"  He stayed on the Amazon for more than a decade  and amassed thousands of specimens,  as well as discovering more than 100 new species of butterfly.
  His work wasn't just an insight into the diversity of life in the tropics.
  It was his theory on butterfly colouration  that would bring him to the attention of the great Charles Darwin.
  He recorded differences in butterfly behaviour.
  Some species flew in a purposeful way.
  Others were slow and fluttery flyers,  Yet they were left largely alone, despite their conspicuous markings.
  Bates was aware that some of the butterflies in his collection  were distasteful to predators.
  He knew from his time in the Amazon that some species,  like these on the left, avoid predation because they contain poisons.
  But here was a butterfly that was almost identical, but not quite.
  In fact, it belongs to a totally different group.
  As he worked through his huge collection, he began to see a trend.
  Each poisonous or distasteful species of butterfly  had a matching copycat,  and he drew them side by side in his book.
  He called these copycats "mimics".
  Bates had stumbled upon a different reason for butterfly patterns,  one where colours are a warning sign of danger to would-be predators.
  Those mimics with a similar wing pattern to the distasteful species  were more likely to be avoided by predators.
  Those that looked less convincing  were more likely to be killed.
  So, over time, evolution causes these copycats  to be almost identical in pattern and colour to the model they mimic.
  Darwin was delighted with Bates's observations.
  The butterfly wing pattern fitted nicely into his new theory of evolution.
  Bates also discovered that the wing pattern of a butterfly  could vary over distance.
  This is a butterfly called Heliconius,  and this is what it looks like in the south of the Amazon basin.
  But this is what it looks like in the north.
  But, even more remarkably, he also discovered that the mimic  varies in the same sort of way.
  That is what the mimic looks like in the south,  and this is what it looks like in the north.
  While Bates explained the importance of wing pattern in anti-predation,  there was one question he was never able to answer.
  How did the mimic avoid mating with the model?  After all, they're almost identical - to our eyes, at any rate.
  We now know that many butterflies  can see a much broader band of the light spectrum,  even the ultraviolet end.
  This Heliconius butterfly on the left  is closely matched by its mimic on the right.
  To our eyes, they look very similar,  but view them in ultraviolet and we can see  that now the mimic is more drab and darker.
  So butterflies themselves  can see the difference more easily than we can.
  The evolution of wing pattern in butterflies is clearly more complex  than those early Victorian collectors could have imagined.
  Indeed, many different factors may play a role  in shaping the colour and pattern of each species' wing.
  But we have Henry Bates to thank  for revealing the connection between colour and defence.
  When Henry Bates returned from the Amazon,  he described his 11 years in the tropics as the best of his life.
  He would spend the remainder of his career  working as Assistant Secretary to the Royal Geographical Society,  a job that really didn't stretch his amazing scientific mind.
  Many collectors have contributed butterfly specimens  to this impressive collection in the Natural History Museum.
  But, thanks to Bates, we are able to see beyond  the dazzling variety of wing colours and find the evolutionary connection  between the many different patterns on the butterfly wing.
  So, the striped coat of the zebra  and the colourful markings of a butterfly's wing  may play similar roles,  helping protect the animals they decorate.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities I find most fascinating of all.
   Female Komodo dragons can give birth to live young  without having contact with a male.
  And female aphids can clone themselves to produce hundreds of copies.
  How and why do these very different creatures reproduce by virgin birth?  Most animals breed by sexual reproduction.
  A male fertilises a female's eggs  and both parent's genes mix and produce young.
  But, in nature, a few animals stray from this method  and breed in a different way.
  In August, 2005, here in London Zoo,  a female Komodo dragon called Sungai  laid a clutch of eggs and, several months later, four baby dragons hatched.
  That may not seem remarkable, but it was.
  Because Sungai had had no contact with a male Komodo dragon  for more than two years.
  At first, keepers thought that she had stored sperm  from the male she had been kept with previously in France.
  But genetic tests revealed that she had, in fact, fertilised her own eggs  and given birth without any male involvement.
  This was an amazing discovery about Komodo dragons.
  That they can breed by a process called parthenogenesis.
  It's a term derived from two Greek words, parthenos, meaning virgin,  and genesis, meaning birth.
  Incredibly, the dragon's remarkable reproductive abilities  went unnoticed until just a few years ago.
  But the species itself had remained unknown well into the 20th century.
  Then stories started to circulate in Indonesia  of a strange reptilian monster living on a tiny island  lying far to the east of Bali.
  It was said to be over six metres long  and strong enough to pull down a buffalo.
  In 1910, two Europeans, members of a Dutch pearling fleet  finally confirmed the existence of these great dragons on the island of Komodo.
  Excited by this finding, photographs of the skin were sent to Major Ouwens,  director of the zoological museum on Java.
  He was equally amazed and employed an experienced Indonesian collector  who captured two live adults and two youngsters for his zoo.
  The land crocodile was identified as a huge and new species of monitor lizard.
  He named it Varanus komodoensis.
  The discovery of this living monster caused a flurry of excitement.
  But World War I prevented further visits to the island.
  And then, in 1926, an expedition was launched  by an American called William Burden  to find out more.
  His small team included his wife,  Dr Emmett Reid Dunn, a reptile expert,  and a newsreel cameraman from Pathé.
  Their film of this giant island creature from a hidden world  caused great excitement worldwide.
  Then, in 1927, two living Komodo dragons were sent to Europe.
  Although they clearly could be dangerous,  they proved to be more gentle and intelligent than expected.
  But it would take 80 years before we fully understood the way they reproduce.
  We know from other examples that the reproduction of reptiles  can be more varied than that of mammals.
  In crocodiles, the sex of the eggs is not genetically fixed,  but is controlled instead by temperature.
  Those incubated at warm temperatures hatch as males  and those in cooler conditions as females.
  But the sex of an unhatched Komodo dragon is determined in a different way.
  The fact that Komodo dragon eggs can develop without fertilisation  was a surprising and exciting discovery.
  But, interestingly, all the babies that hatched were males.
  Why should that be?  Well, this is how it works.
  A female Komodo dragon has two different sex chromosomes,  a W and a Z.
  And the male has two similar chromosomes, a Z and a Z.
  If there are no males, only the female, WZ pair, remain.
  In such a case, the female divides her own egg cell into two halves.
  One of which has a W chromosome, and the other a single Z.
  They then duplicate themselves to form a WW and a ZZ.
  In the Komodo dragon, a WW combination is not an operative pair.
  So only the male ZZ will hatch.
  Thus female Komodo dragons can produce their own males.
  This seems almost unbelievable, but when you come to think about it,  it's a very useful ability for an animal that lives on a small island.
  Komodo dragons are descended from lizard-like ancestors  that lived over 40 million years ago in Asia.
  They migrated to Australia and later reached the islands of central Indonesia  either by swimming or by drifting across the ocean on floating vegetation.
  Parthenogenesis would enable a single female arriving on an island  to start a breeding population all by herself.
  Nobody knew that Komodo dragons could breed asexually  before lone females hatched fertile eggs in captivity.
  In the wild, it's virtually impossible to know  if a female has mated with a male  and there are usually males around.
  In most circumstances, sexual reproduction is preferable.
  A mix of male and female genes can enable the repair of DNA  and prevent unwanted mutations.
  Such genetic variation also helps animals  to adapt to changing environments.
  So sexual reproduction  seems to make more biological sense than parthenogenesis.
  And it should be rare in the wild, an extreme last resort.
  Strangely, that's not always so.
  In 2012, odd breeding behaviour was noticed in two species of snake,  copperheads and cottonmouths.
  Some females were reproducing by parthenogenesis  even though males were present.
  These females were often small and overlooked by the males.
  So, rather than not breed, they cloned themselves.
  But this kind of breeding is potentially a genetic dead end.
  If individuals all have the same genes,  the species can't react to a changing world.
  For whiptail lizards, which live in a harsh but very stable desert,  being genetically the same is actually an advantage.
  For them, parthenogenesis is better than sexual reproduction,  as it prevents them from varying from their winning formula.
  Strangely, the females still go through the motions of mating.
  This stimulates their hormones, but these lizards are taking a gamble.
  If their environment changes for the worse,  they'll be unable to adapt  and so they risk extinction.
  Clearly the best survival technique is to be able to reproduce in either way.
  Parthenogenesis has enabled isolated dwellers, like the Komodo dragon,  to survive by forming breeding populations from just a single female.
  More recently, studies of wild Komodo dragons  have revealed that two-thirds of the population is male,  suggesting that, even when both sexes are present,  asexual breeding is still occurring.
  So, Komodo dragons keep their breeding options flexible.
  It's likely that many animals are breeding by parthenogenesis,  or have the potential to do so, but we just don't know about them.
  Parthenogenesis has been occurring unnoticed for millions of years.
  Here is a natural curiosity that's only just revealing its secrets.
  Next, we meet a tiny animal that uses parthenogenesis  to be one of the fastest breeders in nature.
  Surprisingly, this lives in our own back gardens.
  In summer, this is not an uncommon sight.
  Thousands of aphids massed together on a stem.
  At this time of the year,  each of them can produce five to ten youngsters in a day,  and each is a genetic copy of herself.
  So vast numbers can suddenly appear within a day or so.
  Birds and other insects arrive and prey on them,  but the aphids usually manage to keep ahead.
  This astonishing ability attracted the attention of early scholars.
  In the mid-18th century, a new survey of insects was published in France.
  Its author, René-Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur,  expressed surprise that he'd never seen aphids mating.
  Neither had he seen a male.
  He made the revolutionary suggestion that they were reproducing without sex  and invited his readers to help him prove it.
  In the spring of 1740, Charles Bonnet,  then a young law student from Switzerland,  took up that challenge.
  Charles Bonnet took a newborn female aphid from its mother  immediately after birth  and put it in an isolation chamber.
  He placed the aphid on a leaf inside an upturned glass jar and,  using a magnifying glass, watched it from early morning  until night for 12 days.
  On the evening of June the 1 st, 1740 at 7:30 pm,  the female aphid gave birth to a brand-new baby aphid.
  Then, over the next 21 days, she had 94 more female offspring.
  Bonnet had no clue how this could happen, but he knew for sure  that the aphid had bred without any male contact.
  He sent his findings to Réaumur in Paris,  who published this new and important discovery of sexless reproduction.
  But how this parthenogenesis worked,  and why aphids use virgin birth in their lifecycles  was still a mystery.
  And entomologists puzzled over it for many years.
  In the 1830s, an entomologist called Francis Walker  took a great interest in cataloguing various small insects, including aphids.
  He made more than 13,000 slides.
  Walker collected hundreds of aphids,  many from Southgate and the surrounding areas of London.
  Here we can see some of them.
  He made successive collections of the same species of aphid  from the same locality  across all the seasons.
  As a result, he found several different forms of each aphid  throughout the breeding cycle.
  They varied in size and some were wingless.
  That suggested that female aphids had a rather extraordinary lifecycle.
  It was clear from Walker's study that nearly all individual aphids are female.
  But they change in form over the seasons.
  In early spring, when plants are growing, most are without wings.
  With plenty of food on offer, they have no need to fly.
  Later in the season, when overcrowding becomes an issue,  females are born with wings so that they can travel to find new food.
  Aphids seem to be able to produce females  that can exploit every situation.
  Although Walker was prolific, he wasn't always entirely accurate.
  He recorded many aspects of the aphids' lifecycles,  but he didn't piece them together to produce the complete picture.
  And then aphid research was taken up  by another entomologist called George Buckton.
  He chronicled every detail of the complex aphid lifecycle.
  In 1893, George Buckton published a Monograph of British Aphides  in four volumes.
  He wanted to share his passion for these tiny insects in books  that he hoped would not be too dry academically.
  Buckton corresponded with many leading naturalists of his day  to pull together every possible specimen and record of behaviour.
  He was an accomplished artist  and produced beautiful, accurate drawings from live specimens.
  And they interestingly show a distinct absence of male aphids.
  "The sexual forms of aphides," he wrote, "are in many species, very rarely met.
"  Buckton's drawings confirm that aphid populations are commonly all female  and that males have been almost entirely eliminated from the species.
  For most of the breeding season, females only give birth to daughters.
  They don't waste time producing males,  which can't by themselves produce offspring.
  So, do aphids need males at all?  The lifecycle of another insect would seem to suggest not.
  This wonderful creature is a Phyllium giganteum,  a giant leaf insect.
  It's the largest species of its group and it lives wild in Malaysia.
  Nearly all individuals are female.
  In fact, a male of this species wasn't discovered until 1994.
  They're extremely rare.
  The species for the most part reproduces itself by parthenogenesis.
  They lay unfertilised eggs that hatch into more females.
  And this method of reproduction  has enabled it to extend its range dramatically.
  Much like a single female Komodo dragon arriving on an island,  a lone female stick insect can start a breeding colony in a new area  even if males never arrive.
  And that's what happened in southern England in 1903  when a different species of stick insect  arrived on vegetation imported from New Zealand.
  Now, all female populations survive  thousands of miles away from their native home.
  These populations have no males and don't appear to need them.
  The females produce fertile eggs that survive the cold winters  and new females hatch out in the spring.
  But, without males, the population could become dangerously inbred.
  Aphid populations face the same problems.
  But most species have a twist in their lifecycle  that freshens up their gene pool.
  In the autumn, the aphid production line  switches from producing just asexual females  to producing sexual males and sexual females.
  At the end of the season,  as the food supply wanes and the temperature drops,  there's a phase of sexual reproduction that produces eggs.
  These eggs will over winter  to produce next spring's new aphid generation.
  Aphids don't produce their eggs until the autumn.
  However, most populations survive until then  because, in many cases, they form a relationship with another insect, ants.
  An aphid feeds by piercing the stems of plants and drinking the sugary sap.
  But sap contains far more sugar than the aphids can use,  so they excrete the excess as honeydew.
  This is perfect food for the ants  and they keenly farm the aphids to harvest the rich liquid.
  And in return, the ants protect the aphids  from insects that try to prey on them.
  So, with ants guarding them,  the aphids have a good chance of surviving until the end of the year,  when they produce their eggs.
  In spring, new females will emerge from the eggs  and start once more to produce new versions of themselves,  over and over again.
  And aphids have a final, almost unbelievable, twist in their lifecycles  that greatly speeds up their breeding.
  They do something truly astounding.
  Even before they're born, they have embryos developing inside their bodies.
  Parthenogenesis combined with this telescoping of generations  give aphids an extremely rapid turnover of generations.
  Like tiny Russian dolls,  they just keep popping out smaller copies of themselves.
  A newly-born summer aphid has, inside her body, her own developing daughters,  who in turn contain her fully-formed unborn granddaughters.
  So several generations of aphid overlap in time and space  and, in one season, a single female can produce  thousand upon thousand of cloned females.
  Aphids' lives are varied, often complicated and truly amazing.
  They can change plant host,  change their form, and alter their method of reproduction.
  In the spring, females hatch from eggs  and produce several generation of wingless females.
  Their numbers grow and they produce winged females,  that can fly to new food and rapidly produce even more females.
  In the autumn, the sexual forms of both males and females appear,  which mate and lay eggs, which then can survive the winter.
  The ability to breed by parthenogenesis seems almost magical to us,  but in nature virgin birth is not uncommon.
  Having the ability to produce daughter clones or more males  can save a species or create a new one.
  Flexible ways of breeding have allowed creatures to colonise new areas  and survive in small communities, like those on islands.
  The Komodo dragon has certainly survived for many centuries  and aphids have been around for over 200 million years.
  So parthenogenesis is a breeding strategy that is a real life saver.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities 1 find most fascinating of all.
  some animals appear to protect themselves  with formidable suits of armour.
  The rhino carries plates of thick hide on its flanks  while the hedgehog is covered in prickly spines.
  Both, in previous centuries, inspired far-fetched  and outlandish ideas.
  But what is the true nature of their strange coats?  Rhinoceroses are strange-looking creatures.
  There are five kinds.
  The Indian, this one, has a single horn, squat legs,  tiny eyes Whoa!  And thick, folded skin.
  For many centuries before any had reached Europe, they were  surrounded by myth as much as the unicorn.
  Few people had ever seen a live rhino.
  But, in 1 741 , a young Indian rhinoceros called Clara came to Europe  and she transformed our image and understanding of the rhinoceros.
  Thank you.
  Before Clara arrived,  little was known in Europe about the rhinoceros.
  A few animals arrived here in Roman times,  but they didn't last long, many being slaughtered  during the brutal Roman games.
  1t wasn't until the 1 6th century  that they first made a real mark on Western society.
  1n 1 5 1 5,  a woodcut of a rhino was created by an artist called Durer.
  1t was a beautiful image of an elaborately-armoured creature,  but it was inaccurate.
  1t's doubtful whether Durer ever saw a live rhinoceros.
  It's little wonder that the rhinoceros was thought of  as a magical, mythical creature,  if Durer's woodcut of 1 51 5 was to be believed.
  He shows an armour-plated beast  with a large horn  and a strange little spike on his back.
  But in the 1 8th century, the perception of the rhinoceros was to change,  when Clara came to Europe  on an extraordinary 1 7-year tour.
  Clara was captured in Assam  at just a few months of age when hunters killed her mother.
  A director of the Dutch East 1ndia Company  raised her in his household as a pet.
  she wandered indoors amongst the elegant furniture,  ate from a plate and was a popular attraction at his dinner parties.
  But, inevitably, Clara got too big  and a little-known Dutch sea captain called van der Meer  seized the chance to own possibly the only tame rhino in the world.
  He saw the opportunity of making a lifetime's income  with an ambitious rhinoceros tour.
  Clara became an orphan while she was still dependant on her mother.
  Rhino calves usually stay with their mothers for up to two years,  sustained by the milk.
  Only after that, are they able to feed independently on soft, green grass.
  Keeping a young rhino healthy was certainly a challenge.
  But van der Meer was smart and took good care of his new charge.
  He travelled with her all the way from 1ndia,  around the Cape of Good Hope,  up the coast of Africa to the Netherlands,  and his home town of Leiden.
  He discovered very soon that Clara had a huge appetite.
  And he made sure that she always had plenty to eat.
  Rhinoceros spend a great deal of time feeding.
  They eat plant matter  but they don't have multiple stomachs to digest and absorb nutrients.
  So they need to eat large quantities of food to survive,  up to 1 00 kilos a day.
  1t takes a lot to fuel such an enormous body.
  An adult rhino weighs over a tonne.
  And the 1ndian rhino has a special mobile lip  to help it grasp and rip up the vegetation.
  After reaching Europe,  Clara lived quietly in Leiden for two years,  feeding and growing,  while van der Meer made plans for his European tour.
  At the time, a live rhino was a wondrous thing,  as van der Meer well appreciated.
  He was a clever businessman and he knew that publicity was needed  if his grand tour was to be a success.
  van der Meer made an unusual alliance with an ambitious Dutch anatomist  B.
S.
 Albinus,  who was hoping to produce a definitive medical textbook.
  Both men were looking for publicity.
  And together, they commissioned jan Wanderlaar,  an accomplished artist,  to make prints that would serve to advertise both the book  and Clara.
  They were strange but compelling pictures  that combined precisely-drawn human skeletons  and detailed images of Clara.
  They were the most accurate drawings yet of the rhinoceros.
  Wanderlaar sketched Clara from life.
  He was fascinated by the texture of her skin  and he depicted the rhino more realistically than Durer did.
  so, at last, the myths surrounding the animal's appearance  came to an end.
  As the news of Clara's tour spread,  everyone was eager to see this wonderful new creature.
  And Clara's first trip to Vienna  was for a royal appointment.
  The Empress Maria Theresa  was so eager to see Clara and so impressed by her appearance  and good temperament,  that she brought her children back for another private showing.
  Clara became the talk of the town and European heads of state  were eager to meet her.
  she travelled through Europe like a celebrity  and met both royalty and crowds of curious onlookers.
  Her horn in particular attracted much attention.
  1n Paris, she started a rhino mania,  with fashionable women styling their hair a la rhinoceros.
  some regarded rhinos as living unicorns.
  The scientific name for the 1ndian rhino is, in fact, Rhinoceros unicornis.
  And, at the time, it was believed that the horn was made of bone.
  But this, in fact, is not the case.
  Rhinoceros horn grows from a spongy base  positioned here on the skull.
  The horn has no bony core.
  It's made of keratin, the same substance as fingernails,  and can grow again if it's lost.
  Well, in june, 1 750, Clara's horn fell off,  probably due to her rubbing it on the travel crate.
  To van der Meer, this seemed to be a disaster,  since he had no idea that it would regrow.
  But ingeniously, he used the event as a publicity stunt  and the crowds flocked all the more to see Clara,  fearing that she might be dying.
  Even without a horn, Clara was still a fascinating creature,  and her strange, armoured skin was another talking point.
  Why would such a gentle creature have such thick and elaborate folds?  The rhinoceros' skin in some parts  is almost five centimetres thick,  nearly three times thicker than you would expect for an animal that size.
  We now know that in the wild, rhinoceros are not always as gentle as Clara.
  They can be very aggressive, particularly during the mating season.
  And the tough skin provides them with some protection.
  But it also has other benefits.
  Thick skin is a good barrier against sun, flies  and other parasites.
  But why the skin of an Indian rhino grows in plate-like structures  with deep grooves, has only recently been explained.
  We know that the thicker-skinned areas are good physical protection,  but something deeper is going on.
  1t seems that the large folds increase the surface area of the skin  and help the rhino regulate its body temperature.
  The tissues around the grooves are particularly rich in blood vessels  and transmit heat to the enlarged skin plates which act like cooling radiators.
  1ndian rhinoceros bathe regularly and the folds in their skin  not only trap water but hold it even after they come back onto land.
  so it turns out that the 1ndian rhinoceros' skin  is a far more specialised structure than anyone could've imagined.
  For 1 7 years, Clara travelled across Europe  stopping off in all the main towns and cities.
  Everywhere she went, the crowds queued up to see her.
  she visited England three times,  but her third visit proved to be her last.
  In 1 758, at the age of little more than 20,  Clara unexpectedly died in London.
  van der Meer was deeply shocked,  as he thought she might live to be 1 00.
  Life on the road was over,  but Clara's 1 7-year tour  had changed the image of the rhinoceros forever.
  Durer's classic engraving of the fierce armoured beast  was now a part of history.
  And new accurate images were produced.
  The true Indian rhinoceros, like Clara,  looked just like this wonderful animal painted by the great 1 8th century artist  George Stubbs.
  van der Meer made his fortune with her, on the grand tour,  but Clara, more importantly, also enabled people to  get a first realistic view  of what a rhinoceros looks like  and put to rest the idea of a heavily-armoured mythical creature.
  There is a more familiar animal  whose body armour also perplexed us for a surprisingly long time.
  The hedgehog.
  This delightful little creature  is one of our most familiar garden animals,  and yet it's got a surprisingly unusual appearance.
  Instead of fur, like most mammals,  it's got a thick coat of spines.
  The only parts of its body not covered by them  are its face and its underside.
  The hedgehog's coat may appear to be painfully prickly,  but when the hedgehog's relaxed, it can lay its spines down flat.
  When it senses danger, of course, it rolls itself into a ball  and is completely hidden and protected.
  It's a formidable suit of armour, these spines,  nothing much can get past them.
  1t seems obvious that spines must serve as protection.
  But their function was, in fact, misunderstood for a long time.
  Early books claim the spines were used for collecting food.
  The hedgehogs were said to climb apple trees,  knock down the fruit and roll on it,  impaling the apples on their spines, and carrying them off to their burrows.
  Today, we know that hedgehogs are better at climbing than you might think  but they still haven't been seen to climb trees.
  And there were other myths.
  1n medieval times, farmers believed  that hedgehogs would steal milk from their cows at night.
  so the Elizabethan Parliament put a three pence bounty  on the head of every hedgehog  and thousands were slaughtered as a result.
  Our attitude to the hedgehog is now very different.
  Today, many of us get great pleasure  from seeing this appealing little creature  in our gardens.
  We know that they are a gardener's friend,  feeding mostly on insects and slugs  and helping to rid our plants of pests.
  Some of us even put out special food to attract them.
  We now also understand more about the hedgehog's spines.
  They are, in fact, modified hairs,  hollow inside, but reinforced with keratin,  the same material that forms a rhinoceros' horn.
  That makes them strong, while keeping weight down to a minimum.
  A hedgehog has over 5,000 spines.
  And their main purpose is indeed protection.
  But hedgehogs don't start life with a coat of armour.
  1t'd be painful for a hedgehog mother to give birth to spiny babies.
  But nature has dealt with that problem.
  Tiny hoglets are born with their spines covered by a layer of skin.
  Within a few hours, the thin quills break through.
  The baby hedgehog's first spines are soft and white.
  But these soon fall out and are replaced by darker and harder ones.
  Hedgehog spines are shed and regrown at various stages in their lives,  just like the hair of mammals.
  surprisingly, a spiny armour is not common in the animal kingdom.
  1n Europe, the hedgehog is the only one of its kind.
  But in other parts of the world, there are creatures  that have evolved a similar spiky coat.
  This is an African crested porcupine.
  It's got a formidable coat of spines,  but it's no relative of the hedgehog.
  And the spines are, in fact, very different.
  For one thing, they're very much longer.
  Normally, they lie flat against the body,  but if the animal is irritated,  it erects them to give a very spectacular warning.
  Even the most ferocious predator will take care when approaching a porcupine.
  The quills will break off easily and become lodged in the skin.
  The lions' only chance is to attack from the front.
  As they circle their quarry, the porcupine twists and turns  to keep its armoured back to them.
  This time, the lion got too close.
  1t has no way of removing the spike  and may be unable to feed.
  1t could prove fatal for the predator.
  Although the porcupine's quills may appear thin, even flimsy,  once they get stuck in your flesh,  they're remarkably difficult and painful to remove.
  Why this should be was not known until recently.
  But when looked at under an electron microscope,  you can see that each quill is coated with tiny backwards-facing barbs.
  The barbs act like the teeth on a serrated knife  making it easier to penetrate the skin.
  But when it comes to removing the quills,  the barbs have the opposite effect  and act as anchors, preventing the spine from sliding out of the wound.
  The porcupine's spiky coat seems more formidable than the hedgehog's.
  But the hedgehog has a very effective way  of protecting its vulnerable underbelly.
  1t rolls itself into a ball  so that it is completely encased in spines.
  Foxes do attack hedgehogs,  but a fox must wait until the animal is on the move  if it's to get at its unprotected underside.
  1f the hedgehog stays rolled in a defensive ball,  the fox can't harm it.
  All the hedgehog has to do is to sit it out  until the fox loses interest.
  But if spines are such an effective defence,  why don't many other animals adopt them?  The answer seems to be connected with the difficulties of life with spines.
  spines may be something of a hindrance when it comes to mating.
  1ndeed, early naturalists thought that the hedgehogs must mate belly to belly  to avoid being impaled on each other's spines.
  We now know that that's not the case.
  The spines seem to do nothing to hinder the ardour  of a male hedgehog.
  1f she's willing, he tries to oblige  but it still looks like a tricky and uncomfortable operation.
  Despite the limitations of a spiny coat,  hedgehogs have remained largely unchanged  for almost 1 5 million years.
  And new evidence suggests that the spines  may play another rather surprising role in their lives.
  Hedgehogs, when encountering an unfamiliar or toxic object,  sometimes behave in a very strange way.
  They will lick and bite it until they start to foam at the mouth.
  The froth is then transferred to their spines.
  We still don't fully understand this strange behaviour.
  1t may help to camouflage the hedgehog's smell  or make the spiny coat more distasteful to predators.
  Or maybe it helps hedgehogs communicate with each other.
  Or make them more attractive to the opposite sex.
  We might one day discover its true purpose, but we haven't yet.
  Our familiar British hedgehog  has provoked some very strange and far-fetched ideas.
  But for many of us, it remains one of the most engaging  animals in the British countryside  and its prickly coat makes it that much more attractive.
  so it turns out  that some of the early ideas about the purpose of the rhino's armour  and the hedgehog's spines  were only partly correct.
  Their true functions are far more complex  than we yet realise.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities I find most fascinating of all.
  In this programme, I examine the remarkable lives  of two animals that have mastered  the problems of life in the dark.
  The giant squid,  which lives in the deepest oceans,  and owls,  highly-specialised hunters that seek their prey at night.
   When you think of animals of the night,  owls tend to come to mind.
  In fact, not all owls are nocturnal.
  But those that are have a very similar shaped face.
  Round and flat.
  And the most prominent facial features  are the large forward-facing eyes.
  These give them a seemingly wise look.
  And, in fact, owls have often been revered for their wisdom.
  But they have also been linked  with legends of death and evil.
  They are birds of the night.
  To many, they seem eerie and mysterious.
  But how good is an owl's eyesight?  Can they really see what we can't?  The colour picture that forms at the back of our eyes  is very much like that  that forms in the eyes of a bird.
  We have roughly the same number of colour receptors.
  But when day changes to night, the picture changes.
  Then different receptors come into play called rods.
  And owls have a much higher proportion of rods in their eyes than we do.
  So they are extremely good at seeing at low light levels.
  Aren't you?  The barn owl sets off to hunt shortly after dusk.
  As the light fades, we struggle to see.
  But the owl has no such problem.
  Flying low, it keeps its eyes trained on the ground,  looking for any movement of the grass.
  Its eyes now give it the edge over its prey.
  And it can hunt at a time when few other birds can.
  And there's another important difference  between an owl's eye and ours.
  The pupil in front of the eye, the hole,  is very much bigger than ours.
  Ours measures around 8 millimetres across.
  An owl's, like this tawny owl, is around 13.
  That means very much more light can get into the eyes,  so the picture formed on the retina is very much brighter.
  In fact, it's about three times as bright.
  - (HOOTING) - Oh!  - (HOOTING) - Oh!  So unlike other birds, which cannot see so well in the dark,  the owl can remain active throughout the night.
  But the specialist eyes create problems.
  Squeezing a large eyeball into a relatively small skull  requires changes.
  The shape of the owl eye is more tubular than round.
  And this may help to increase the size of the image  on the retina at the back.
  But the owl eye shape and size presents certain problems.
  It doesn't fit snugly into the skull  and there's no room in the socket for muscles to move it.
  And there's another problem.
  A closer look at an owl's skull  shows that its ear openings are very big.
  So the only way for the tubular eyes to fit into the skull  is for them to be placed in the middle of the face  in a forward-looking position.
  And this limits the owl's field of view.
  But owls have a trick  that allows them to dramatically increase their field of view.
  They can rotate their heads nearly all the way round.
  Folklore has it that you can kill an owl  by walking in circles round a tree in which one is perched  and so make it twist its head off.
  That, of course, is not true.
  But owls can certainly turn their heads through  270 degrees in either direction.
  If we tried to do that,  we'd tear our arteries and break our necks.
  So how do owls do it?  Recently, scientists have discovered  that it's due to a remarkable adaptation of their bones.
  Owls' necks, as you can see in this skeleton of an eagle owl,  have 14 vertebrae.
  That's twice the number that we have.
  And this gives them greater flexibility.
  But only recently, CT scans  have shown researchers how the owl can rotate its head  without passing out.
  Cavities within the neck bones are 10 times larger  in an owl's neck than in ours,  giving more room for vital blood vessels that run up to the owl's head.
  What's more, the carotid arteries enter the head  much higher up the neck  and are centrally positioned.
  And this may help avoid damage during twisting.
  And the owl's arteries seem to widen below the brain,  allowing blood to pool.
  This may create a vital blood reservoir  that guarantees blood flow to the brain  should the vessels below be squeezed while the head is turning.
  So the owl can turn its head almost all the way round  without risk of injury.
  So owls have successfully dealt with the problems  created by having large eyes.
  (HOOTING)  But are these eyes really all they seem?  It was long thought that owls can see perfectly  even on the darkest of nights.
  But that is not the case.
  On cloudy nights and beneath trees with dense canopies,  they can only discern the faintest silhouettes.
  It's nowhere near detailed enough to hunt for prey.
  But the owl has another sense to help it.
  Acute hearing.
  In the 18th century, the great French naturalist Count de Buffon wrote,  "Their sense of hearing seems to be superior to that of other birds.
  "And perhaps, to that of every other animal,  "for the drum of the ear is proportionately  "larger than in quadrupeds.
  "And besides, they can open and shut this organ at pleasure,  "a power possessed by no other animal.
"  Well, we know today that that's true  of some owls, though not all.
  But Buffon was quite right  to draw our attention to the remarkable hearing of owls.
  (HOOTING)  The owl's large ear openings are not visible  because they're hidden beneath the face feathers.
  And, unlike other birds, they have fleshy outer ears like our own.
  In many owls, they are positioned  at slightly different levels on either side of the head.
  And it's these features that help them to accurately pinpoint their prey.
  Most owls have very similar shaped faces, flat and round.
  It's called a facial ruff.
  And it's formed from feathers that are particularly dense and bristly.
  And they lie flat on either side of the face,  just behind the opening to the ears.
  It's thought that they deflect the sound into the ears.
  In fact, the facial ruff seems to be a kind of sound amplifier.
  The barn owl has a distinctive heart-shaped ruff  and its face acts like a satellite dish,  focusing the sounds from below into the ears.
  Its soft flight feathers  enable it to move through the air in all most complete silence,  so that it can hear the slightest rustle  and approach its prey undetected.
  But few have as large a facial ruff as the great grey owl.
  Although it hunts during the day,  its prey is hidden under a cover of snow.
  So it has to rely entirely on its ears.
  Studies have shown that owls' hearing is particularly acute  for very quiet sounds.
  In fact, part of an owl's brain  that detects sound has three times as many neurons  as its equivalent, in say, a crow's brain.
  And the hairs of the inner ear, which detect the vibrations of sound,  are particularly abundant in an owl.
  And not only that.
  Whereas, the equivalent hairs in my ear degrade with age,  in an owl's, they are regrown.
  So whereas my hearing gets worse as I get older,  an owl's always remains very acute.
  The owl's ears may, in fact, be more crucial  to its nocturnal lifestyle than its eyes.
  But by combining all its senses,  it has solved the problems of living in the dark.
  So it seems that the shape of the face  helps both the owl's sight and its hearing.
  So whether or not you think the owl is wise,  it certainly has a head for life in the dark.
  Next, we journey into the darkest of places  to try and unravel the life of a creature  that has long captured our imagination.
  Here, in the Natural History Museum, is a specimen of an animal  that has fascinated humanity for thousands of years.
  It's a giant squid.
  This particular one was netted off the Falkland Islands,  immediately put on ice and then brought here  to the museum in London.
  Few museums have complete,  or as perfectly-preserved specimen as this one.
  This one measures about eight metres,  the length of a London bus.
  But others have been caught even bigger.
  One about twice the length, that weighed around a tonne.
  Very few people have ever seen one of these creatures alive.
  And that's because they live at depths of around 1,000 metres.
  And down there, it's pitch black.
  So how do these animals manage to hunt in such conditions?  That's a question that's proved exceedingly difficult to answer.
  Sailors, a long time ago, told stories  of having seen a gigantic squid-like creature  known as the kraken.
  It was said to have huge tentacles, strong enough to grip and sink a ship.
  The tales seemed unlikely and far-fetched.
  But could the giant squid perhaps  have been the source of these extraordinary reports?  The first clues to this creature may, in fact, be real  came from the tales of sailors  on whaling ships in the 18th and 19th centuries.
  Some of them reported in their ships' logs  that they often noticed  strange circular scars on the heads and jaws of captured sperm whales.
  The scars suggested a fierce wrestling match with some enormous beast.
  But what creature could take on a 70-tonne whale?  Inside of the stomachs of the whales were clues.
  A number of hard indigestible objects, like this one.
  It looks a bit like a beak of a parrot.
  But, in fact, it belongs to an entirely different kind of animal.
  To a cephalopod.
  Cephalopods are marine animals  that include the octopus, the squid and the cuttlefish.
  This beak is a mouth part of one such creature,  and is used to tear its prey into small pieces.
  The sailors on the whaling ships immediately recognised the beak  as being from a cephalopod.
  But its size suggested a creature many times bigger  than any known species.
  Cephalopods have a ring of eight or ten arms, or tentacles,  which they use to push food into their mouth  in the centre of the ring.
  The arms are equipped with round suckers to help hold onto their prey.
  And it's the marks from these  that were found by sailors on the bodies of sperm whales.
  Could a gigantic squid have caused such injuries?  And how massive must it be to tackle a sperm whale,  one of the biggest animals on the planet?  And then, in 1873,  fishermen caught what they called a sea monster  off the coast of Newfoundland in Canada.
  After killing it with their knives, they lost the body.
  But they brought the head and tentacles to the local clergyman.
  The clergyman bought it off the fishermen for $10  and displayed it in his living room  by carefully draping it over a bath stand  to show off its many arms and tentacles.
  The photograph clearly proved that here was a gigantic squid  with its beak at the top and over seven-metre-long tentacles.
  Here, at last, was the evidence  that the monster of the deep, the kraken,  really does exist.
  But the giant squid itself  continued to evade scientists even after its discovery.
  It's only since the invention of submersibles  that we've been able to follow it down into its deep sea home.
  Even so, we seem to have had little success  in finding the elusive giant.
  So scientists are now trying to piece together its biology  by looking at other closely-related animals.
  This is an octopus.
  And it uses both its eyes and its tentacles  to explore its surroundings.
  The octopus's brain is distributed throughout its body  so that its arms can control much of their own movement.
  It also has highly complex eyes  and sees in much the same way as we do,  with a lens projecting an image onto the retina behind.
  But while our eyes focus by squeezing the lens to change its shape,  the octopus' eyes focus like a camera,  with a lens moving in and out.
  The giant squid's eyes have much the same structure  as those of an octopus.
  But when it comes to size,  it has the biggest eye in the animal kingdom,  as large as a football.
  For seeing in dim light, a large eye is better than a small one.
  So many animals of the deep have exceptionally big eyes.
  But, in order to see at all,  there has to be some light.
  And the giant squid lives at depths of 1,000 metres.
  Although very little sunlight reaches the deeper parts of the ocean,  there is another kind of light there.
  It's produced by the deep sea animals  and is called bioluminescence.
  The light is produced by a chemical reaction  in the same way as that in a glow stick does.
  When I shake and snap the stick,  two chemicals called luciferin and luciferase  react together to produce a bioluminescent glow.
  Like this.
  There.
  Some deep sea animals use their own luciferants to produce light,  while in others it's produced by bacteria,  living within special light organs.
  A flashing light can act as a lure,  or confuse a predator.
  It's thought that about 90% of deep sea creatures  produce bioluminescence.
  And they use it in a number of different ways.
  All these fish come from the deep sea,  and they all produce light in one way or another.
  This is the football anglerfish.
  And it has a modified ray from its dorsal fin  which has a lot of little tentacles on the top.
  And the tip of each tentacle produces a little green light.
  So it looks as though there's a little shoal  of small creatures, maybe shrimps, hovering above it  in the blackness.
  And when some other shrimp thinks it might join some friends  and come along that way,  the angler fish simply tilts up, opens this immense jaw  and has its breakfast.
  This, on the other hand,  is a stoplight loose jaw.
  And it operates in a different way.
  It produces red light from two little organs at the front.
  Hardly any other species of fish in the sea can see red light.
  So it can hunt that way and find its prey.
  And when it does it opens this immense loose jaw and engulfs it.
  There you are.
  Back you go.
  But what about the giant squid?  Could it also be producing bioluminescence?  Some of its close relatives apparently can.
  This is the vampire squid.
  It has eight arms lined with tooth-like projections.
  And when threatened, it turns itself inside out,  wrapping its body in a dark cloak.
  If that doesn't work, the squid has another trick.
  Small lights at the end of its arms  flash like eyes to distract the predator.
  With so many creatures of the deep producing light,  you might think that the giant squid would do so as well.
  But scientists studying their carcasses have not been able to find any evidence  of light-producing bacteria or pigments in their bodies.
  So it seems that the ocean's elusive giant  truly hides in the dark.
  Although it may not produce its own light,  the giant squid  can surely see the bioluminescence of others.
  And this may help it to locate its prey.
  With no sightings of a living giant squid since it was first discovered,  we seem to be no closer to discovering the truth.
  But, in 2004,Japanese scientists finally made a breakthrough.
  Using small squid as bait,  they were able to attract a live giant squid.
  These first images are tantalising.
  But they still reveal little of the animal's true behaviour.
  Where does it live and how does it feed?  Questions such as these remain unanswered.
  In spite of its great size,  the giant squid has proved remarkably difficult to find.
  No doubt scientists will continue  to search for it and discover more about it.
  But my guess is that the giant squid  is likely to remain ahead of the game.
  That this natural curiosity is likely to see us before we see it.
  Both the owl and the giant squid live in a world with little light  and both have evolved large eyes,  the better to see the world around them.
  But while we've unravelled the owl's ways of surviving in the dark,  much about giant squid still remains a mystery.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle,  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities 1 find most fascinating of all.
  some animals have mastered the art of deception.
  The cuckoo tricks other birds into raising its young,  while the death's-head hawkmoth infiltrates the nests of bees  to steal their precious honey.
  They're cheats and imposters.
  (CUCKOO WARBLING)  The call of the cuckoo has long been regarded as a sign of spring,  but, in fact, it's the call of a killer and a cheat.
  The cuckoo lays its egg in the nests of other birds  and somehow persuades them to treat it and its chick as if it were their own.
  How does it get away with it?  It's a question that has puzzled people for centuries.
  1n Britain, the cuckoo arrives at the time  when most birds are nesting and laying eggs.
  Early egg collectors notice that the nests of some birds  had a slightly odd-looking egg in them.
  These are the eggs laid by a number of different birds.
  Marsh warbler, spotted flycatcher, linnet and the whitethroat.
  And amongst each of those clutches, there is a fraudster.
  A cuckoo egg, which mimics that of its host.
  Although cuckoos are long known to lay their eggs in the nests of other birds,  no one had actually described it happening.
  And then, in the 1 8th century, an English country doctor,  with an interest in natural history decided to investigate.
  Edward jenner lived here in Berkeley, Gloucestershire  and is best known for his work on the smallpox vaccine.
  In fact, he's said to be the father of vaccination and that  his work has saved more human lives than that of any other man.
  What is less known is that he first achieved scientific distinction  by his observations on the behaviour of the cuckoo.
  At the time, it was believed that a cuckoo removes  all of the eggs in a nest and then lays its own.
  By doing so, it would ensure its own chick gets all the food brought in  by the unwitting nest owners.
  But Edward Jenner's detailed observations were to reveal  a rather darker tale.
  jenner's work on cuckoos was published in 1 788  here in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal society,  the world's first scientific society.
  It was entitled simply  Observations on the Natural history of the Cuckoo by Mr Edward jenner.
  In it, he reported that it was not the parent cuckoo,  but the newly-hatched chick,  which pushes the eggs and nestlings of the foster parents out of the nest.
  As soon as it hatches, the cuckoo chick's instinct  is to kill anything else in the nest.
  1t's still blind and naked, but it has a cup-shaped depression on its back,  into which an egg fits perfectly.
  But, sometimes, the other eggs hatch earlier.
  And Jenner's observations of how the cuckoo chick deals with its nest mates  were quite shocking.
  He writes, ''The mode of accomplishing this was very curious.
  ''The little animal with the assistance of its rump and wings  ''contrived to get the bird on its back  ''and making a lodgement of the burden by elevating its elbows,  ''clambered backwards with it up the side of the nest,  ''until it reached the top, where, resting for a moment,  ''it threw off its load with a jerk and quite disengaged it from the nest.
''  The real villain had been uncovered.
  jenner's views were met with incredulity and some disbelief,  but, nonetheless, they earned him the fellowship of the Royal Society.
  It was the greatest honour that could be given to a scientist at the time.
  Jenner's observations had revealed the true nature  of the cuckoo's deception.
  But it still wasn't clear why the cuckoo should opt for this strange way  of raising its young.
  1t wasn't until 1 00 years later that Charles Darwin  finally provided an explanation with his theory of evolution.
  The cuckoo's behaviour has evolved to increase its own breeding success.
  By avoiding the task of raising chicks,  the cuckoo can lay more eggs than any other bird,  as many as 25 in a season.
  While it makes evolutionary sense for the cuckoo to lay its eggs  in the nests of others, what about its victims?  Why do they put up with this trickery?  1t seems that they sometimes don't.
  And this was revealed in an early natural history film in 1 920.
  The Cuckoo's Secret was made by Edgar Chance and Oliver Pike,  an egg collector and a wildlife filmmaker.
  Chance was fascinated by cuckoos  and spent a great deal of time following them.
  He was the first person known to see a cuckoo lay its egg.
  The deception involved stealth and speed.
  The female waits until a nest is unattended and then she strikes,  but, if she's spotted, the owners fight back.
  1f she's successful, the whole deception takes less than 1 0 seconds.
  she removes and eats just one egg and replaces it with her own.
  The Chance and Pike film solved one mystery, but there were still others.
  How does the cuckoo choose its victim?  And why don't the nest owners reject the alien egg?  Green warblers are one of the cuckoos main targets,  and the pair has a nest just in here.
  The female warbler has laid four speckled eggs  and, using a model egg, I can illustrate the cuckoo's trickery.
  This is the sort of egg that the cuckoo would lay in the reed warbler's nest.
  It matches the reed warbler's actual egg very closely in colour.
  Experiments with model eggs have shown  that reed warblers have become very good at recognising an alien egg,  and either throw it out or desert their nest to start afresh.
  so the cuckoo has to make sure that it produces an egg  that is a very good match.
  The cuckoo and its victims are evolving competitively.
  (WARBLING)  With each generation, cuckoos improve their mimicry,  while the nest owners become better at spotting a foreign egg.
  While many birds are very good at detecting a strange egg in their nest,  they seem incapable of recognising the monstrous cuckoo chick as an imposter.
  But the deception is not complete.
  The young cuckoo is much larger than a reed warbler chick,  so it also needs a lot more food.
  How does it get enough?  The cuckoo has a solution.
  1t now uses vocal deception,  to trick its foster parents into providing more food.
  This is a sonogram of the sound waves produced by a single reed warbler chick  begging for food.
  And below it is the call of a cuckoo chick.
  And as you can see, it looks very different.
  In fact, it more closely resembles the calls  of a whole nestful of reed warbler chicks.
  so, the cuckoo chick's call is a super stimulus  that sounds like a whole nestful of chicks.
  And it appears to work.
  The adult birds rush back and forth providing the imposter  with the same amount of food as they would for an entire brood of their own.
  At three weeks old, the cuckoo chick has spilled out of the nest.
  1t's now almost eight times the size of its foster parent.
  1t was over 200 years ago that Edward Jenner first shocked us  with his revelation of the cuckoo's extraordinary lifestyle.
  Now we know that its unusual behaviour is due to an extraordinary arms race  that has resulted in one of the most fascinating specialisations in nature.
  The cuckoo's success relies on deceiving just two parent birds,  but our second subject is a moth that is able to deceive hundreds of bees.
  How does it infiltrate one of the most heavily-guarded nests in nature?  This wonderful creature was once one of the most feared insects in Europe.
  It's a death's-head hawkmoth.
  And it's easy enough to see how it got its name.
  It has this mark on its back that looks just like a human skull.
  This gave it a bad reputation that lasted for centuries,  but now there are new ideas about this moth's strange appearance  that may help explain its extraordinary ability to rob hives  without being stung.
  Death's-head hawkmoths are a rare sight in Britain,  for they spend most of their lives in Africa and Asia.
  But every summer, a small number of migrants arrive in northern Europe,  and, if the weather is warm enough, they breed.
  Their caterpillars, unlike the drab adult moths, are beautifully coloured.
  After feeding for several weeks,  they can grow to a length of 1 3 centimetres.
  Once ready to become adults, they pupate in the soil,  and emerge as the sinister, strangely-patterned moths.
  In the early 1 9th century, a region of northern France  was hit by a terrible pestilence.
  And, at the same time, a large number of hawkmoths were seen in the area.
  The local people linked the deaths to these night-flying insects.
  But there was another even more disturbing side to this moth.
  It could make an unusual noise.
  (SQUEAKING)  There, a strange squeak, and that only added to its chilling reputation.
  Moths don't usually squeak.
  Tiger moths sometimes produce ultrasonic warning clicks  that tell bats that they're poisonous and not good to eat,  but this is not a noise we can generally hear.
  Perhaps the death's-head hawkmoth squeaks to scare predators like birds.
  However, other large migratory moths don't make such a sound.
  This makes the death's-head hawkmoth's squeak all the more surprising.
  And it has intrigued people for centuries.
  These moths are more than 200 years old.
  We know that because the hand-written label there  tells us they were collected in 1 801 by a Robert Darling Willis,  the personal physician to King George III.
  George III is well known  as the king who suffered from bouts of madness.
  And on a visit to see the King during one of them,  Dr Willis discovered these large moths in the monarch's bed chamber.
  Unable to identify them, the doctor sent them to his grandson,  who was at that time superintendent at the Museum of Zoology in Cambridge.
  He confirmed that they were death's-head hawkmoths.
  And, unusually for an insect, this moth produces a loud call  that has been likened to the mournful cry of a grief-stricken child.
  Did the disturbed king hear the plaintive calls of a hawkmoth?  That, we don't know.
  But, certainly, many of the ordinary people of the 1 9th century  were struck with a sense of terror whenever this moth appeared.
  The moth's unusual appearance and strange behaviour baffled people.
  But in nature, such traits usually have a purpose.
  And it may be for the death's-head hawkmoth,  that they enable it to break into beehives and steal their honey.
  These are the giant honeybees of southeast Asia.
  And they form some of the largest bee colonies in the world.
  1 once got up close to one in order to demonstrate  their response to a predator.
  1 had a model of a large hornet, which produced a kind of Mexican wave  and that makes it very difficult for an aggressor to land.
  This covering of bees looks impossible to penetrate.
  But at night, a thief can break through their ranks.
  A death's-head hawkmoth lands on the carpet of bees  and pushes its way through without being attacked.
  1n just a few seconds, it takes some sips of honey and emerges unharmed.
  Getting past the guard bees is quite a feat,  but surviving inside is even more astounding.
  Death's-head hawkmoths raid domestic beehives too and can be quite a pest.
  somehow the moth slips past the guards and, as if invisible,  walks through the hive heading straight for the honeycomb.
  1t then feeds unnoticed.
  How does it do this?  One theory proposes that its spooky appearance  may help it avoid being attacked.
  Miriam Rothschild, a great entomologist and expert on fleas and butterflies,  suggested that the moth's skull pattern looks like the head of a worker bee  and that this could play a role in the moth's deception.
  Well, this is a photograph of a worker bee face  taken through a microscope.
  Let's see how it looks next to a close-up photo  of the skull pattern of the moth.
  There.
  Well, I suppose there's a slight resemblance,  but given the fact that most moths raid beehives and nests during the night,  it's unlikely the bees could see that much detail.
  The most likely answer lies in the scent the moth gives off.
  1n America, in the 1 950s, a German entomologist called Thomas Eisner  studied chemical ecology, in particular, the chemical defences of insects.
  Most famously, he illustrated how bombardier beetles fire hot acid  onto a predator.
  He also studied moths,  and showed that the feathery projections on their abdomens  and their large antennae were used to produce and pick up scent.
  1t seemed that many insects were using scent in surprising ways.
  Tests on the chemical scents produced by hawkmoths  reveal a remarkable similarity to those produced by the worker bees  in the hives that they raid.
  Their scent is not identical, but it contains several key chemicals  that exactly match those produced by bees.
  so, the death's-head hawkmoth's scent acts as an invisibility cloak  that makes it undetectable to the worker bees in the nest.
  With thick scales on its body, clawed feet that grip the honeycomb,  and a short, pointed proboscis to pierce the honey cells,  the moth has evolved into an effective hive robber.
  But there is another even more impressive imposter  that can also penetrate the protective defences of an insect colony.
  1ts victims are not bees, but ants.
  The imposter that invades this ant nest doesn't get in there by flying,  nothing as blatant as that.
  Instead, the caterpillars of some species of blue butterfly,  like this one, wait for red ants to collect them.
  Remarkably, passing ants don't kill them.
  They pick them up and take them back into their nest.
  The cuckoo caterpillar will stay inside the nest for up to 1 0 months.
  just like the death's-head hawkmoth, it produces a chemical scent  that deceives the ants.
  This pink caterpillar, which belongs to the Alcon blue butterfly,  has been collected because, to them, it smells just like the young  of their own nest.
  They become controlled by the imposter's intoxicating scent,  and feed the butterfly larva even more regularly than they do their own.
  There's another way this imposter pulls off its deceptive trick,  when it's inside the nest, the butterfly larva makes a strange chattering noise.
  To our ears, it's very faint, but it's clear enough to other insects.
  This is it.
  (LARVA CHATTERING)  And this is the sound that's made by a queen ant.
  (QUEEN ANT CHATTERING)  To worker ants, these calls are very similar.
  And they react by treating the butterfly larva  as if it's one of their own.
  Caterpillars of the blue butterfly are impressive imposters.
  Not only do they mimic the scent of the ants, but their queen's calls too.
  This seems to trump the death's-head hawkmoth's ability as a nest invader.
  But the hawkmoth may also be using sound to trick its victims.
  Remember the eerie squeak that was thought to be so frightening?  (SQUEAKING)  There.
  The hawkmoth makes this sound inside the beehive  when it enters to steal honey.
  It's been suggested that this might calm the bees  because the squeak is thought to sound like the piping call  that the queen honeybee makes to pacify her workers.
  We can't be sure if the call and the strange skull marking  evolved to deceive bees, but we can be certain that the death's-head hawkmoth's  life as an imposter is more curious  than the superstitions that have surrounded it for hundreds of years.
  The cuckoo and the hawkmoth are both audacious imposters,  but the cuckoo's ability to make its victim raise its young  is perhaps the most accomplished deception of all.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle,  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myth and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd,  the curiosities I find most fascinating of all.
   Some animals acquired frightening reputations  almost as soon as they were discovered.
  In this episode, we investigate the stories surrounding two such creatures.
  - (GORILLA BELLOWS) - The gorilla and the vampire bat.
  Why did they get such bad reputations? And were they justified?  This statue in the London Zoo is of Guy the Gorilla.
  He was perhaps the zoo's most well-known resident  and became one of the world's most famous gorillas.
  In his prime, Guy weighed in at over 200 kilos.
  His neck, as you can see, was thicker than a man's waist.
  And he stood 5'4" tall, over a metre and a half.
  And that was with his knees bent.
  When Guy arrived here, in 1940, little was known about gorillas.
  And the reports from Africa hinted of a creature that was shockingly brutal.
  So it's hardly surprising that people flocked to see  this fearsome monster for themselves.
  But Guy proved to be a gentle giant who won the affection of the public.
  So how and why did the gorilla gain this reputation as a fearsome savage?  Today, we know a lot about gorillas and their way of life.
  There are, in fact, a number of different kinds,  some of which live in the lowlands and others in the mountains.
  They stay in small family groups  and spend much of their days feeding on leaves and shoots.
  Many people, including myself,  have travelled a long way to meet these close relatives of ours.
  Remarkably, despite being the largest living ape,  the gorilla was one of the last to be described by science.
  In 1847, an American missionary and naturalist, Thomas Savage,  was travelling back home from Africa  when he stopped off to stay with some friends in the Congo.
  His friend's house was decorated with African curiosities  and one of them caught his eye.
  A skull.
  But it was not like one that he'd ever seen before in Africa.
  It had two huge eye sockets,  a crest like a Mohawk haircut, running from front to back,  and another running transversely across here.
  These are anchor points for huge muscles for the jaw and the neck.
  And he knew immediately he was looking at a spectacular new species.
  But he had no time to go in search of it.
  He frantically negotiated with some African hunters  and managed to acquire further skulls and bones of the same kind of animal.
  When he got back to the States,  Savage handed the specimens to an anatomist friend  who immediately recognised that they belonged to some kind of ape.
  He gave it the scientific name "Gorilla,"  a Greek word meaning "wild, hairy people.
"  He then sealed the reputation of the gorilla  with the convention of adding the surname of the person who discovered it.
  In this case, Thomas Savage.
  (GROWLS)  But many people misguidedly assumed that the scientific name Gorilla savagi  was a description of the nature of this newly-found ape.
  Though gorillas had somehow remained  unknown to science until Victorian times,  other great apes were already quite familiar.
  They were all commonly called orangs after the most famous of them,  the orang-utan,  which the Dutch had encountered in Indonesia in the 17th century.
  Shortly afterwards, the Portuguese had discovered chimpanzees in Africa.
  And by the time reports of the gorilla appeared,  both chimps and orangs had been appearing in circuses  at the courts of European royalty for over 200 years.
  The first gorillas to arrive in Britain were dead specimens.
  And, unlike these later arrivals, they were often badly preserved.
  They went on display at the Crystal Palace  and their grotesque appearance was supported  by horrific accounts of their nature.
  One of the early collectors of gorillas  was an American anthropologist called Du Chaillu.
  He made numerous expeditions to Africa  and returned with tales of terrifying encounters with gorillas.
  In this, his bestseller,  Exploration and Adventure in Equatorial Africa,  amongst the sensational tales of cannibalism,  charging buffalo and tropical fevers,  is a very first eyewitness account  of man meeting male gorillas in their jungle home.
  "He was a sight I think I shall never forget.
  "Nearly six feet high with immense body,  "huge chest and great muscular arms,  "with fiercely glaring large deep-grey eyes,  "and a hellish expression of face  "which seemed to me like some nightmare vision.
  "Thus stood before us this king of the African forest.
"  To be fair, Du Chaillu did dispel some of the more ridiculous stories  and myths about the gorilla.
  But his compelling tales of their fierce nature  was just what the public wanted to hear.
  (GORILLA HOOTING)  Du Chaillu's vivid description of the gorilla in the wild  reinforced its image as a fearsome beast and confirmed its reputation.
  These displays may look fearsome,  but, in fact, they're only rarely followed by physical violence.
  Du Chaillu's description may have wowed readers,  but the scientific establishment were rather less easy to impress.
  He was branded a braggart, a plagiarist and a charlatan.
  Some suggested he'd never even visited Africa  and that his ferocious creatures were, in fact, gentle.
  But he had his strongest support right at the top.
  Professor Richard Owen, founder of the London Natural History Museum.
  Owen was one of the most respected figures of Victorian science.
  But also one of the most widely disliked.
  He was vehemently opposed to Darwin's theory of evolution  which suggested that apes and humans were closely related.
  Du Chaillu's description of a ferocious gorilla suited Owen  because it seemed to support his view  that we could not possibly be related to such dreadful monsters.
  But he could hardly deny the anatomical similarity between gorillas and humans.
  This illustration from 1855  shows the skeleton of a man and gorilla side by side.
  It was published by Owen himself  and makes clear the likeness between the two species.
  But Owen was still not willing to accept that man could have ape-like ancestors.
  In 1860, a great debate about evolution  and man's place in the natural world took place in this very room in Oxford.
  Richard Owen presented compelling evidence for the presence  of three structures in the human brain that were absent in a gorilla's.
  According to Owen, this made the descent of man from apes impossible.
  As the only anatomist with access to gorilla specimens,  he was confident he was on firm ground.
  But he hadn't counted on biologist Thomas Henry Huxley.
  Huxley, known as Darwin's bulldog, was, in his own words,  "waiting for this opportunity to nail that mendacious humbug Owen  "like a kite to a barn door.
"  And immediately challenged his findings, vowing to prove him wrong.
  In the years that followed, Huxley doggedly pursued Owen  and did indeed prove him wrong on all counts.
  He found all three brain structures in the apes  and proved apes were closer to men than to monkeys.
  Richard Owen had, according to Huxley,  been, "guilty of wilful and deliberate falsehood.
"  (GORILLA HOOTING)  Owen and Du Chaillu's misleading descriptions of the gorilla  failed to disprove our relationship to apes.
  On the contrary, they became a turning point in our acceptance  that they are our cousins.
  But, sadly, the damage to the gorilla's reputation had already been done.
  When Guy arrived in London almost 100 years  after the discovery of gorillas,  people still regarded him as a fearsome and savage beast.
  It took the next 30 years of Guy's life  for a more accurate picture of the gorilla to emerge.
  Although gorillas can indeed be dangerous when angry or threatened,  most of the time, they are mild and peaceful creatures.
  And nowhere is this shown more clearly  than in a charming story from Guy's time here at the zoo.
  Guy's cage often attracted sparrows that then became trapped inside.
  But rather than kill them,  Guy would lift the tiny birds carefully onto his hand,  examine them and then release them.
  He was indeed a gentle giant.
  Over time, thanks to the determination of field researchers like Dian Fossey,  people have seen another side to gorillas.
  By the time I met them,  many of us were ready to see them not as savages  but as animals that are equally suited to their environment as we are to ours.
  So now, at last, the gorilla, which was once labelled a fearsome beast,  has managed to shake off its undeserved reputation.
  (BAT SCREECHING)  Our second subject, the vampire bat,  has also had an undeservedly bad reputation  and been the inspiration behind tales of evil.
  Bats have had a bad reputation for a very long time.
  As creatures of the night, they're connected with dark mysteries  and devilish goings on.
  But there was never any real evidence to support  these claims of their evil nature.
  That is, until the Conquistadors returned from South America  with tales of giant bats that dropped down on you as you slept  and sucked the very blood from your veins.
  Tales of vampire bats.
  Stories of giant, blood-sucking bats  have long been part of the culture of South American people.
  Images of them with savage fangs are common.
  And a bat god was associated with death.
  But it wasn't until the 18th century  that a detailed description of a vampire bat was published in Europe.
  And it came from one of its victims.
  An Englishman by the name of John Gabriel Stedman came back from  South America with reports of having been bitten by a vampire.
  He described a bat of monstrous size  that sucked the blood of men and cattle when they're fast asleep.
  And he proudly declared that he had managed to catch the beast  and cut off its head.
  Stedman's descriptions were detailed but nonetheless misleading.
  His drawing shows in fact the bat that feeds on nectar  and is only a few centimetres long.
  He had been bitten by a vampire but he had blamed the wrong bat.
  Clouded by their own ideas of what a vampire should look like,  early naturalists jumped to all sorts of conclusions  and assumed that it was the biggest and the most ugly  that were the bloodsuckers.
  In fact, the name "vampire" was sometimes given to bats  that looked the part but had never so much as sniffed blood.
  These bats, for example,  drawn by the 19th century German naturalist Ernst Haeckel,  belonged to a group called the leaf-nosed bats  because of these strange protrusions around the end of the nose.
  This gives them a particularly menacing appearance  and some early naturalists thought that the nose leaf was, in fact,  the mark of a vampire.
  The leaf-like object on its nose was thought to be so sharp  the bat could use it to puncture a victim's skin.
  And since many bats have such nose leaves,  over 100 species were mistakenly described as vampires.
  In fact, the nose leaf is made of nothing more than soft flesh  and couldn't possibly draw blood.
  It's used for echolocation.
  (BAT MAKING SHRILL NOISE)  Echolocation works like sonar.
  The bats produce high-frequency calls  and use the returning echoes to build up a mental map of their surroundings  so they're able to find their way in the pitch dark and hunt for prey.
  Most bats produce these calls in their throats.
  But leaf-nosed bats project them out through their nose in a beam.
  By doing so, they can feed and echolocate at the same time.
  (BAT CHIRPING)  So many leaf-nosed bats had been discovered  that the arrival in Europe of a specimen of another smaller species in 1810  attracted very little attention.
  It was simply named Desmodus rotundus on account of it being a little portly.
  Some 30 years later,  when Charles Darwin was travelling around the world aboard The Beagle,  he observed Desmodus feeding in the wild for the first time.
  He saw it drinking the blood of sleeping horses and cattle.
  He had at last identified the true vampire.
  We know that there are only three species of vampire bats  and they all live in South America.
  They're totally unique in being the only mammals to feed exclusively on blood.
  But feeding on blood is not as easy as you might think.
  It's actually a pretty challenging diet.
  Blood is made up of water and protein and has virtually no fat.
  So vampires find it hard to get enough energy.
  They must consume 50% of their own bodyweight in blood each night  or they'll die within a few days.
  Under the cover of darkness, the vampire sets out to hunt.
  The nose leaf and echolocation help it to home in on its prey.
  The bat approaches carefully.
  Unlike most other bats, it can use its wings as legs  and it walks on its elbows.
  Once near its victim, it uses its nose leaf in another way.
  It acts as a heat-seeking device,  guiding the bat to the warmth of its prey.
  Today, livestock have largely replaced wild jungle animals.
  But even livestock can be dangerous to a small bat.
  Patiently, the vampire stalks its prey.
  And, at last, it's close enough.
  The teeth are so sharp that a nick is all that's needed.
  Blood from the wound doesn't clot, but continues to flow.
  And, within a quarter of an hour, the bat can drink 40% of its bodyweight.
  That's the equivalent to one of us drinking over 20 litres.
  Having had its fill, it's back to the roost.
  Finding a meal every night is not easy.
  But vampires have come up with a solution to that problem.
  Those which have been successful share the blood they've drunk  with those who had failed to collect any.
  Vampires are most likely to share  with those they know well from roosting and grooming together.
  It's an act of apparent kindness.
  But the colony, as a whole, benefits.
  So it seems that there is another, gentler side to these bats  than anyone could have imagined.
  Unfortunately, just as light was being shed on the true nature of the vampire,  an Irish novelist published a book  that would seal their reputation for the foreseeable future.
  Bram Stoker's classic Dracula  leaves little doubt as to where his inspiration came from.
  His story combined European myths of vampires that come to haunt the living  with stories of blood-sucking bats from South America.
  And it's an association that the real vampire bats have struggled to shed.
  More recently, vampire bats have made headlines once again.
  It's been discovered that their saliva  contains a remarkable blood-thinning agent  that's been named "Draculin.
"  And its proving to be the most successful treatment for stroke victims.
  How ironic that a creature we once believed to be a deadly threat  may turn out to save human lives in the future.
  Maybe it's time we re-evaluated the reputation  of the much-maligned vampire bat.
  Vampire bats and gorillas were long pursued by unfair reputations.
  But while our fear of gorillas has turned into respect and admiration,  the vampire bat, for many of us, continues to evoke mixed emotions.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities 1 find most fascinating of all.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The abilities of some plants and animals  are so remarkable that they seem to be almost supernatural.
  1n this programme,  1 investigate the shocking power of a fish  that advanced our understanding of electricity.
  And plants with senses that are surprising modern science.
  But how did these extraordinary powers help the organisms that produce them?  The freshwater eel is surrounded by legends.
  The first Europeans to explore the New World  heard amazing stories about it.
  And when, in the 1 8th century, specimens of this strange fish reached Europe,  they created a sensation.
  In 1 776, Captain George Baker,  an American mariner and whaler,  made the long and difficult journey from South America,  across a raging Atlantic Ocean,  to bring five, live electric eels to London.
  These are two of his actual eels.
  Captain Baker and his five electric eels, or Gymnotus, as they were known,  set up shop in the Haymarket  and offered two shillings and sixpence for a shock  or five shillings for a spark.
  Baker's eels had come all the way  from the lower reaches of the Amazon and Orinoco rivers  where he had heard tales from the locals  about their astonishing powers.
  They called these fish ''trembladores''.
  Humboldt, the famous naturalist and explorer,  had described how he had witnessed horses  being killed by the repeated shocks from these fish.
  And he himself accidentally stepped on one  and vividly described the effect.
  ''With each stroke you feel an internal vibration  ''that lasts two or three seconds followed by a painful numbness.
  ''All day, 1 felt strong pain in my knees and in all my joints.
 ''  I encountered this remarkable fish in its natural environment  where I filmed at the same rivers  that Humboldt explored.
  There was talk of me swimming with the eel,  but, thankfully, we had some technical difficulties  with the diving equipment that I was supposed to wear.
  And so I stayed safely in the canoe  and was able to demonstrate another subtler  but equally remarkable side to this fish.
  The eels were constantly producing electric discharges.
  somehow, they were generating a small, nonstop flowing current.
  (DEVICE BUZZING)  They were also able to sense electricity  and were attracted to electrical pulses  emitted from my underwater detector,  suggesting that electricity plays a key role in their lives.
  But at the time of their discovery,  no one knew the full functions of their extraordinary abilities.
  We know now that the shock was caused by electricity.
  And I can demonstrate it by touching the animal with an electrode.
  Watch.
  There, you see?  The scope in the lights are flashing up and down.
  Extraordinary.
  But this is only a small indication of the real power of this fish.
  If I were to try and pick it up,  I could get a jolt of an astonishing 600 volts,  which is quite enough to kill me.
  This 1 960s educational film illustrated the shock  even though the equipment used prevented the volunteers  from getting its full power.
  They were to join hands and then connected to a live eel.
  (VOLUNTEERS EXCLAIM IN SURPRISE)  Ah.
  Firm believers in electric eels.
  Thank you very much.
  You can imagine how startling Baker's electric eels were 200 years ago.
  In the 1 8th century,  electricity was becoming one of the most fashionable areas  of scientific investigation, but it was still very poorly understood.
  Very few advances had been made since its discovery 1 50 years earlier  by Elizabeth I's personal physician, William Gilbert.
  Gilbert repeated a trick that had been known about since Greek times.
  Rubbing a piece of amber with cat fur  that allowed the amber to attract a small object, like a feather.
  Let's give it a try.
 Here's a bit of amber.
  There.
  It has always been assumed  that this amber effect was caused by magnetism,  but Gilbert showed that it was something different.
  He named this new force after the Greek word for amber, electron,  and so electricity was born.
  Londoners of the time developed a fascination for this magical force.
  showmen staged bizarre spectacles to demonstrate its properties.
  1n one, a young boy attached to a friction generator  attracted small pieces of paper to his hands.
  1n another, a gentleman kissed a lady and was repulsed by the charge  carried through her whalebone corset.
  No one knew what to do with electricity,  but a better understanding of its nature was slowly emerging.
  More and more ingenious ways were developed  to create what we now call ''static electricity''.
  And soon, it became something more than just a quirk of rubbing amber,  it became visible as a spark.
  -(ZAPPING) -Ooh.
 (CHUCKLES)  The ability to produce this characteristic blue spark,  along with its invigorating smell, became the signature of this new force.
  And it prompted scientists to make obvious comparisons  with other natural phenomena.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  1n the American colonies,  Benjamin Franklin bravely, or perhaps foolishly, flew kites into thunderstorms  and proved that lightning and the electric spark  were one and the same.
  But there's another common property of lightning and static electricity,  that is the ability to shock.
  It wasn't long before a comparison  was made between the shock from the early generators  and the shock that could be delivered by a fish.
  The electric eel wasn't the only kind of fish  known to give humans a powerful jolt.
  The ancient Egyptians knew that the electric catfish  could also give shocks and they called it the ''Thunderer of the Nile''.
  And in the nearby Mediterranean lives the torpedo ray.
  1ts muscle batteries make it so bulky,  it can't undulate its body like other rays,  but has to propel itself by waving its tail.
  Like the electric eel,  it uses its discharge to stun the other fish on which it preys.
  Sadly, the pressure of celebrity  and having to produce shocks and sparks to order  exhausted Baker's long-suffering eels and they didn't last the winter.
  But two were preserved and expertly dissected by john Hunter,  a very distinguished Scottish surgeon of the time.
  And he found a great number of striped muscular layers  that proved to be where the electricity was generated.
  They're now referred to as ''Hunter's organs''.
  He found these muscles along the tail  and sides of the eels arranged in stacks.
  One scientist called Galvani  believed that animals had their own natural electricity  even without these electric organs.
  And he tried to prove this by connecting wires to frogs' legs  and making them twitch.
  He called this phenomenon ''animal electricity''.
  But another scientist called Volta had other ideas.
  He proved that the frog was  merely a conductor for electricity with a simple experiment.
  Volta replaced Galvani's frog  with discs of cloth soaked in saltwater or acid  and sandwiched them between two different metals.
  I can do the same thing with filter paper,  copper two pence pieces  and these simple galvanised zinc washers.
  Watch.
  Tuppenny piece,  filter,  and washer.
  There.
 Nearly 0.
6 of a volt.
  But the amount of electricity he generated was tiny,  certainly not enough to make the spark seen from eels.
  Unlike Galvani,  Volta saw no distinction between animal electricity  and his new electricity from metals.
  So, he now looked to animals  to see how he might amplify his new device.
  Was it significant  that the muscles producing the electric power in the eels  were arranged in stacks?  Volta decided to add more stacks to his electric pile.
  We call this way of connecting electric cells together ''in series''  and we now know that it increases the voltage.
  But Volta was about to find this out for the first time.
  He piled up his tiny cells  like the bands of muscle in an electric fish.
  Here, I've got 1 0 pairs and just watch.
  Nearly six volts.
  Wonderful.
  Volta could now produce heat, shocks,  and even sparks from electricity in a continuous, never-ending stream.
  He had made the first battery, partly inspired by the electric eel.
  The pieces of the puzzle had come together  and the eel's example had helped  to advance our understanding of electricity.
  Eels, in fact, contain natural batteries,  stacks of special muscles.
  It's amazing to think when electricity is so much a part of our lives today  that, before Volta, the only source of electricity was lightning,  a few static generators and fish like this incredible electric eel.
  Understanding how electric eels manage to find their way around  revealed a hitherto unknown animal sense.
  But it's not just animals that have surprised us.
  We're now discovering that plants, too,  have intriguing abilities that are still mysterious.
  We think of plants as passive, still, and silent,  but they may have more in common with animals than you might think.
  New research suggests that they have surprising abilities.
  It depends on how you look at them.
  1 first started seeing plants in a different light  when making a series called The Private Life of Plants.
  We used time-lapse photography to reveal the way they move.
  The bramble spreads aggressively, seemingly unstoppable.
  Other plants pulse to the rhythms of day and night  and flower buds explode like fireworks.
  so with speeded-up film,  we've been able to translate their time into ours,  and to realise that they're constantly on their move.
  Two hundred years ago, one plant that moved very quickly indeed  attracted the attention of a great scientific mind.
  1t appeared to behave like an animal  and could move fast enough to catch its own food.
  Charles Darwin was fascinated by the Venus flytrap.
  He called it ''one of the most wonderful plants in the world''.
  He recognised that it could move in a very different way  to that of plant growth.
  This movement was not only fast but also repeatable.
  Darwin experimented and found that  the traps were not triggered by raindrops,  but only by a very particular stimulation of the leaf hairs,  such as an insect might make.
  But what intrigued him most was the speed of the reaction.
  He sent one of these flytraps to a friend,  Dr Burdon-Sanderson, who was performing groundbreaking work  on muscles and electricity.
  His tests confirmed that the tiny, electrical discharge  caused by an animal muscle cell contracting  was almost identical to those signals  obtained by attaching electrodes to the flytrap when it was shutting.
  Although plants have no muscles,  electrical stimulation enables them to move in a similar way to animals.
  Electrical signals cause cells to change the pressure  of sap in their leaves, so creating movement.
  As a result, some plants, like animals, can actively catch their prey.
  Recently, it's been discovered that other plants use electricity too,  but for a very different purpose.
  Plants are rooted to the ground and have a small, negative charge.
  The higher up the plant you go, the greater the electric charge.
  This creates an electric field around the flower.
  We can't see it, but these electrodes are picking up  -(DEVICE HUMMING) -The energy of this tiny field  and converting it into the sound that we can hear.
  Bees, on the other hand, have a positive charge.
  Friction whilst flying causes them to lose electrons,  leaving them electrically charged.
  As a bee approaches a flower,  the charge fields around the flower  -and the bee interact -(WHINING CHANGES FREQUENCY)  And the sound changes.
  There.
  And when it lands, the positive and negative fields  immediately cancel each other out.
  As this happens, there are two very surprising consequences.
  Firstly, the plant's negatively-charged pollen  actually jumps across onto the positively-charged bee.
  Secondly, the plant has a changed electrical field.
  And when another bee comes along,  it detects this altered electrical signature  and avoids the flower.
  The plant is, in effect, telling the bee  that it has no nectar and to come back later.
  When the flower has refilled its stores of nectar,  it creates a new electric charge  which attracts another passing bee.
  This simple on/off signal benefits both the bee and the flower,  but it does have its limitations.
  The electrical field is tiny  so insects can only detect it at close quarters.
  But flowers can also  draw attention to themselves over much greater distances  and they do this by floating messages in the air.
  The perfume of a flower is not just a pleasant smell,  it's also the primary way  in which plants communicate with insects.
  A rose can contain over 400 chemical compounds  and the bee can recognise a particular combination from over a mile away.
  Very latest research has discovered that 90%  of the chemicals made by plants are also produced by insects.
  And that is no coincidence.
  Most flowers produce scent to persuade insects to visit them,  but others use it in a more sophisticated way.
  For protection.
  Cabbages communicate with each other using smell.
  When the leaves of one plant are being attacked by caterpillars,  it releases a scent which warns its neighbours.
  They then produce chemicals in their leaves  that caterpillars don't like and so they avoid being eaten.
  And scent also serves to call in the cavalry.
  Leaves that are under attack give off a chemical alarm signal  that attracts wasps, which obligingly pick off the caterpillar attackers.
  so, vegetables, fruits, leaves and flowers  are constantly communicating with each other using touch,  vision and smell.
  They seem to exploit all the senses apart, that is, from hearing.
  But there are old stories that one particular plant  is able to produce a very strange sound.
  Hundreds of years ago,  a plant with a root that was thought to resemble  a human body was said to emit a sound that could kill.
  The root was known to have strong anaesthetic  and hallucinogenic properties  and, in the 1 st century AD,  it was called a ''mandroga'' or ''mandrake'' as it's now known.
  It was associated with magic and the supernatural  and was thought to derive power  from a demon that emitted a dreadful and fatal shriek  if the plant was uprooted.
  Fortunately, there were creative ways of avoiding death from the killer sound.
  One account advised plugging one's ears  and then tying a starving dog to the mandrake plant.
  And then, as the dog lunged for food,  the plant would be uprooted.
  The dog would tragically die from the mandrake's shriek,  but the man would survive.
  This particular story may have arisen  because drinks made with the mandrake root can produce hallucinations.
  But we're just beginning to realise that the sensory abilities of a root  could be as sophisticated as the rest of the plant.
  Latest research suggests that roots are communicating underground.
  And we now have the technology to eavesdrop on the roots' world.
  Believe it or not, the roots of these corn seedlings can make and sense sound.
  The noise is very quiet, but we can hear it with this equipment.
  If I place a corn seedling in front of a laser beam like this.
  Now, the sound vibration can be detected and we can hear it through a speaker.
  (CRACKLING)  There.
  That strange crackling is the sound of corn roots growing.
  It can be seen as pulses on the screen.
  It's been shown, too, that the corn roots respond to the sound  when it's played back to them.
  Time-lapse footage shot over just a few hours  clearly shows the roots growing towards the tiny speakers that emit the sound.
  There's much speculation about the purpose of this curious phenomenon.
  Perhaps, it helps roots avoid growing into hard objects  or being too close to competing plants.
  It could act like simple echolocation.
  We just don't know, but it's the first clear evidence  that plants have a rudimentary form of hearing  and might even be communicating underground using sound.
  Sensitive equipment is creating a new window  into the plant world and it seems that, like animals,  they have a sophisticated sense of their environment  and possessed abilities that not so long ago,  we would have thought of as supernatural.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities I find most fascinating of all.
   Some animals live in conditions so cold  that they seem to defy the rules of nature.
  The Emperor Penguin is the only animal  able to raise its young during the harsh Antarctic winter.
  And the tiny wood frog faces freezing conditions  that would kill any other amphibian.
  How do they do it?  These eggs were collected more than a hundred years ago  during an expedition to the Antarctic.
  The conditions were so cold that the man who collected them  never made it back to England alive.
  He perished alongside Captain Scott  during the ill-fated journey to reach the South Pole.
  The eggs were laid by an Emperor Penguin,  a bird whose life history  would surprise and confound those early polar explorers.
  At the end of the 19th century,  the Antarctic was an unfamiliar and mysterious place.
  Only a handful of explorers had ventured this far south  and there was still a huge blank in the world map.
  But then, in 1901,  a British expedition set off on a purpose-built ship,  the Discovery, to explore this most southerly land.
  In charge was Commander Robert Falcon Scott.
  Scott took on board with him a young man named Edward Wilson  who would serve as the ship's doctor and naturalist.
  Wilson had only just qualified as a surgeon  and had no formal training in scientific research,  but the young man's passion for natural history and art  would prove to be an invaluable asset to the expedition.
  Wilson's job was to draw and record  any plants or animals that they encountered.
  But, from the start,  there was one creature that fascinated him more than any other,  the Emperor Penguin.
  This largest of all penguins had only been discovered 60 years earlier.
  But, as yet, nothing was known about its habits  or where it breeds.
  The expedition was an opportunity to find out more.
  When the Discovery reached the southern continent,  they put up a hut in which they would spend the long, dark winter.
  Then as the sun started to appear again in spring,  the sledge team started to explore  and one returned with some tantalising news.
  They had discovered a breeding colony of Emperor Penguins  in a place called Cape Crozier.
  It was the first colony any human being had ever seen.
  And much to their surprise,  the birds were breeding on sea ice.
  It was a truly astonishing discovery.
  No other bird breeds on ice  and Wilson was keen to find out more about this remarkable creature.
  Very little was known about Emperor Penguins,  but there was another bird  which could give Wilson some insights into their lives,  the King Penguin.
  Adult King Penguins look very much the same as adult Emperors.
  The main difference is in size.
  These Kings are only about half as big as an Emperor.
  And they live in the northern part of Antarctica.
  They breed in the middle of the Antarctic summer,  November, December,  and incubation takes about seven weeks.
  And Wilson thought that Emperors would do very much the same.
  But he was about to discover otherwise.
  The following spring, with the hope of collecting some penguin eggs,  Wilson left for Cape Crozier as early as he dared.
  When he got there however, much to his surprise,  he found only well-grown chicks.
  After repeated calculations,  he finally concluded that these penguins must lay their eggs  in the middle of the Antarctic winter.
  That Emperors should start breeding  at the coldest and bleakest time of the year,  was an astonishing discovery.
  It seemed to defy all the rules of nature.
  And Wilson was indeed amazed.
  But it seems that this strange lifestyle does, in fact, make sense.
  Emperor Penguins are big birds  and their chicks take more than a year to grow large enough to be independent.
  By laying the eggs earlier in midwinter,  the Emperors give their chicks a head start,  so that they first go to sea in the summer months  when food is plentiful.
  But how do Emperor Penguins protect their eggs and chicks  from the bitter cold?  Neither Kings nor Emperors make a nest  or lay their eggs on the ground.
  If they did, the eggs would freeze within minutes.
  Instead, they keep their eggs on the top of their feet  and cover them with a feathered fold of skin from the abdomen.
  And inside that pouch,  the temperature is about 70 degrees warmer than it is outside.
  With temperatures of minus 60 degrees Celsius  and winds gusting at 200 kilometres an hour,  the birds huddle together for warmth.
  Even under these extremely difficult conditions,  Wilson recorded everything he saw.
  Able to work for only a few minutes at a time,  he still managed to produce detailed notes and drawings  that give us a first insight into the southern continent.
  This is the expedition's scientific report  and it contains most of Wilson's observations in the Antarctic.
  At a time when illustrations of animals were often drawn from dead specimens,  Wilson drew his subjects live in the field, wherever possible,  to capture the true nature of the animal.
  Despite the extreme conditions under which he had to work,  he made over 900 detailed drawings in the Antarctic.
  Wilson was an exceptional artist and a meticulous scientist.
  And most of his observations have stood the test of time.
  But some things puzzled him more than others.
  He noted, for example, that the brooding of the chick  was not just carried out by one bird or even by a single pair.
  It appeared as if numerous birds  were taking turns in looking after the chick.
  Today, of course, we know that this is not quite correct.
  It's only the parents who care for both the egg  and then the chick.
  We now have a much better understanding of how Emperor Penguins breed,  but Wilson's confusion as to who cares for the chick  is, in fact, quite understandable.
  He observed numerous occasions  when a youngster was accidentally dropped by its parent.
  In his report, he writes,  "What we actually saw, again and again,  "was the wild dash made by a dozen adults,  "each weighing anything up to 90 pounds,  "to take possession of any chick  "that happened to find itself deserted on the ice.
  "It can be compared to nothing better than a football scrimmage.
 "  The birds Wilson had observed were, in fact, females  who had lost their own egg or chick  and were trying to adopt or kidnap any unattended youngsters.
  What he couldn't know  was that these adoptions are never successful.
  The new parent rarely feeds its foster chick  and simply broods it for a few days.
  After that, the youngster is abandoned again  or dies of starvation.
  It's likely that the female eventually recognises  that the adopted chick is not her own.
  Although Wilson had been the first man to find an Emperor Penguin colony,  he had not been able to obtain any freshly-laid eggs.
  These were particularly sought after by scientists of the day.
  It was thought at that time  that the Emperor Penguin was one of the most primitive birds  and possibly a missing evolutionary link with dinosaurs.
  If embryos could be obtained at an early enough stage,  then maybe one would see reptilian scales  or some other dinosaur features.
  So the Emperor Penguin egg  was regarded as a great scientific prize.
  A few years later, Scott and Wilson  planned a second expedition to the Antarctic.
  The main objective was to reach the South Pole,  but Wilson was determined  to bring back newly-laid Emperor Penguin eggs.
  This time, he made plans to travel to Cape Crozier even earlier  so as not to miss the birds on eggs.
  He picked two men to accompany him,  Bowers and Cherry-Garrard,  and they set off in the pitch black of the winter.
  It was a journey of over 70 miles  and they had to cover it on foot.
  For six painful weeks,  the three men pulled their heavy sledges  in complete darkness and howling gales,  at temperatures of minus 40 degrees centigrade.
  Never before had anyone travelled in such bitter cold  or in such difficult conditions.
  They sometimes barely covered a mile a day.
  It was what Cherry-Garrard would later call,  "The worst journey in the world.
"  Their clothes were iced up  and their breath and sweat froze on their bodies.
  Each night, it took them an hour  to chip into their sleeping bags, which were frozen solid.
  When they finally reached the penguin colony,  they collected five eggs with great difficulty  and put them inside their mittens for safety.
  The men staggered back to base camp close to death  and only three eggs survived the journey.
  These are two of them.
  It was an extraordinary feat of determination  by Wilson and his companions.
  The precious eggs were supposed to reveal the evolutionary links  between reptiles and birds.
  But getting them had nearly killed the collectors.
  A few months later,  Scott led his party on the final push to reach the South Pole.
  His team consisted of just five men  and Wilson was amongst them.
  On their return journey, all five men perished,  succumbing to the cold and starvation  just a few kilometres from their nearest food depot.
  In the end,  Wilson's eggs didn't contribute as much to our understanding  of the development of the penguin chick  as he had hoped.
  But his beautiful drawings and meticulous observations  are quite a different matter.
  They helped to unravel the biology of a bird  that is able to rear its young in the depths of the polar winter.
  The Emperor Penguin amazes us  by raising its chicks in the most inhospitable place on earth.
  But a small frog has a way of coping with the cold  that seems to be beyond belief.
  This is a North American wood frog  and it lives as far north as the Arctic Circle.
  But like all cold-blooded creatures, it can't generate its own heat.
  And its body temperature rises and falls with the surroundings.
  So when conditions drop below zero, the frog risks freezing.
  How does a creature like this survive the harsh winters?  The skin of amphibians is thin and moist  and this makes them particularly vulnerable to the cold.
  Any contact with ice  can instantly trigger freezing inside their bodies.
  And, for most animals, this means almost certain death.
  When water freezes, it expands  and the sharp ice crystals can puncture blood vessels  and break cell walls causing irreparable damage.
  The animal's internal organs may never function properly again.
  So how do frogs avoid freezing?  Many sit out the winter by hibernating at the bottom of a pond.
  The surface may freeze but underneath the ice,  the temperature remains just above freezing.
  And most land-living amphibians  seek out a sheltered spot underground to avoid the deadly frost.
  But in the 18th century,  Arctic travellers came back with tales so extraordinary  they were scarcely believable.
  A British explorer called Samuel Hearne  reported seeing frozen frogs among the piles of leaves in Arctic Canada.
  He went on to make an extraordinary claim,  "Frogs of various colours are numerous in these parts.
  "I've frequently seen them dug up with moss,  "frozen as hard as ice,  "in which state, the legs are as easily broken off as a pipe stem  "without giving the least sensation to the animals.
  "But by wrapping them up in warm skins  "and exposing them to a slow fire,  "they soon recover life,  "and the mutilated animal gains its usual activity.
"  Seems an unlikely story.
  Frozen frogs that, if gently warmed by a fire,  would come back to life.
  What truth could there be in this account?  Well,  this is a marsh frog,  and it's found in ponds and marshes throughout Central and Northern Europe.
  It's lying completely immobile in my hand  because it's frozen solid.
  From the outside, it feels much like a rock.
  And you might be forgiven for thinking it was dead.
  Well, watch what happens  when I put it into a bowl of warm water.
  Although it appears dead and has in fact stopped breathing,  the frog's heart is still beating.
  Only the outer layer has frozen.
  The vital organs inside are still undamaged.
  Lab experiments have shown that in this state,  the marsh frog can survive temperatures of two degrees below freezing.
  Yes, it's lifted itself up.
 It's moving.
  Look at this.
  There, it's moving its right leg.
  Within a few minutes,  the frog has awakened to life once again.
  This is surely one of the most extraordinary miracles in nature.
  Nonetheless,  the marsh frog can only survive a few hours of freezing.
  Anything more would mean certain death.
  Where it lives, it rarely faces extreme winters  and is protected from the worst by the insulating water.
  So what about Samuel Hearne's story?  Could some frogs survive longer periods of freezing?  Another account from North America would seem to suggest so.
  In the 19th century, a naturalist called John Burroughs  found a wood frog underneath the leaf litter at the beginning of the winter.
  Burroughs was surprised,  but reasoned that the frog must know that a mild winter was on the way  and had therefore not bothered to bury to itself deeper.
  In fact, a very severe winter followed.
  Wondering about his frog,  Burroughs went back to the same spot in spring  and found the animal seemingly unharmed.
  The wood frog must have spent the entire winter above ground  and survived temperatures that should have killed it.
  How did the tiny frog do it?  The wood frog is not strong and large enough  to dig itself into the ground  so it has to sit out the winter beneath the leaf litter.
  But this doesn't provide sufficient protection against the cold.
  So how does this small frog survive?  Today, we know the truth.
  And if Burroughs had done so, he would have been astounded.
  It's only recently that we've discovered just how the wood frog  avoids the usually fatal consequences of freezing.
  As winter sets in,  the frog prepares for an extraordinary change.
  First, it draws water out of its cells  into spaces where it would do less damage if it freezes.
  At the same time,  its liver produces large amounts of sugar that act as antifreeze.
  This is pumped through the body to slow down the freezing.
  Now, the entire frog  slowly freezes from the outside inwards.
  And, finally, the heart stops.
  The frog isn't dead,  but it's probably about as close as you can get.
  Seventy percent of its body is frozen  and it can remain like this for several weeks on end.
  Then, as the air warms up again,  a miraculous transformation takes place.
  The ice melts and the frogs body thaws  and, suddenly, the heart sparks back to life.
  Unlike the marsh frog, the deeply-frozen wood frog  needs several hours before it can resume normal activity.
  The wood frog's ability to survive in a frozen state  has fascinated scientists.
  Could this one day help advance our own medical understanding?  We still don't completely understand  how the wood frog survives something that would kill most animals.
  What we do know  is that, when freezing occurs slowly and in the right places,  it appears to do less damage.
  This little frog seems to have mastered the problem  by controlling how and where ice forms in its body.
  The Emperor Penguin's ability to breed during the Antarctic winter  is a remarkable feat of endurance.
  But for a small frog to freeze solid and come back to life,  must surely be one of the most astonishing curiosities of nature.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities 1 find most fascinating of all.
  spiders spin intricate webs using their own silk  and birds weave nests from strips of leaves.
  1n this programme,  1 investigate the skill of these spinners and weavers  and the way they use such materials  to produce such truly complex structures.
  (CHIRPING)  Birds build a variety of nests,  each with a design that is characteristic of their species.
  The simplest nests are just sticks wedged into position,  but some are more complicated.
  The long-tailed tit builds a delicate nest  from plant material and spider silk  and weaver birds do literally weave with leaves.
  But are such skills learned or instinctive?  In 1 905, Eugene Marais, a South African writer and scientist,  was intrigued by the complexity of weaver bird nests.
  He wanted to understand more about their nest-building skills  and performed a rigorous but simple experiment  to see if they learnt how to make nests  or if they built them using what he called ''cultural instinct.
''  He took eggs from a pair of wild weaver birds  and put them into a canary's nest to hatch.
  Then he encouraged the next three generations  of weaver birds to breed, but gave them no nest material  and hatched their eggs once again on the canary's.
  When nesting time came for the fourth generation of weaver birds,  he gave them natural nest materials and, without hesitation,  they vigorously set about constructing perfect wild nests.
  so nest-building is largely under genetic control,  but it is influenced by experience and the environment.
  Nests of the same kind of weaver bird are not always exactly the same,  and the birds, of necessity,  must have some flexibility in how they build.
  Nests that hang are particularly difficult to make,  as the birds have to work against gravity,  with no support from below.
  Weaver birds solve part of this problem with a skill none others have.
  They're the only birds that can tie knots.
  These knots vary and are worked on until the weaver succeeds  in attaching several strands of grass to a suitable branch or stone.
  These first fastenings are crucial,  as the whole of the completed nest will hang from them.
  Once the birds have secured the foundation,  they can start to weave.
  Weaving is just one way of binding leaves together.
  There are others.
  These are tailorbird nests.
  They consist of folded leaves stuffed with soft material  and stitched together using spider silk.
  The tailorbird pierces the leaves with its sharp beak  and then binds them together by pulling silk through the holes.
  The complete operation involves a number of different skills.
  Making the holes is like riveting.
  Two leaves are placed together  and then pierced to create matching holes above and below.
  Then the edges are sewn up.
  The upper surface of the leaf  is kept to the outside to help the nest look unobtrusive.
  The result is a secure pocket,  which is then stuffed with a soft lining.
  The materials the birds choose to sew up their nest can vary.
  At the turn of the century,  there was a report in The Common Birds of Bombay  of weaver birds watching carpet-makers and tailors  as they worked on verandas.
  When the coast was clear,  the birds flew down and stole tiny pieces of thread  with which to sew up their nests.
  (SQUAWKING)  Birds search with a clear idea  of what would be suitable nest material.
  Many use sticks and twigs.
  (CHIRPING)  They will, however, occasionally use other material  that does the same job  and their choices are sometimes surprising.
  This nest was found in an aircraft hangar in the 1 950s,  and is made entirely of twisted wire.
  When it was discovered, it contained two blackbird eggs.
  1t's an unusual nest for a blackbird,  but similar nests have been found belonging to crows and pigeons.
  Weaver birds work with natural material  and, like the tailorbird,  they have to solve the problem of joining leaves together.
  After making a knot to secure the basic framework,  they begin their weaving.
  They construct the main egg chamber  and then add a small entrance  around the first securely-knotted ring of leaves.
  The male, as he works, is under intense scrutiny.
  Females are looking for mates, and males that build firm,  well-positioned nests are favoured as fathers.
  When he finishes,  a male advertises his handiwork by fluttering.
  But he may be forced to build several nests  before a female finally chooses him as a partner.
  Weaver birds' nests are very conspicuous.
  Other birds, however, go to some trouble to conceal them.
  We may not have tailorbirds or weaver birds in Britain,  but we do have long-tailed tits,  delicate little birds that make intricate and finely-constructed nests.
  With tiny repetitive movements, they use loops of spider silk  to felt together a mixture of wool and moss.
  Both male and female work on the construction.
  As their nest takes shape,  they decorate the outside with several thousand tiny flakes of lichen.
  The nest is then lined with hundreds of feathers  and provides a delicate but strong structure  to house the growing chicks.
  (CHIRPING)  And it's a nest that's particularly hard to find,  because of its covering of lichen.
  For years, it was believed  that this acted as a sort of camouflage  to help hide the nest,  but the recent discovery of long-tailed tit nests  covered with small flakes of paper and polystyrene  have helped explain more clearly the reason for this decoration.
  Rather than helping to blend the nest with its background,  these small flakes reflect light from it,  making it almost invisible,  and it seems paper and polystyrene do the job  just as well as lichen.
  The largest and perhaps the most long-lasting nest of all  is made by the social weaver bird.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  They live in the dry areas of southern Africa  and work together to build what looks like a great haystack  up in a tree.
  New nest chambers are continually added.
  As many as a hundred pairs of birds may live together  under the one roof, as you might say.
  The chambers provide shade during the day  and keep out the chill at night.
  And the whole construction is so robust  that it may provide mass housing  for generation after generation of birds.
  Recently, the biggest nest ever recorded  was discovered attached to telegraph poles  in the Kalahari Desert.
  1t's more than seven metres across and three metres high.
  so weaver birds make their nests in many different ways  and it was once thought that they worked entirely by instinct,  but this is not so.
  They are amongst the most expert nest-builders  in the animal kingdom.
  And this array of nests shows the complex  and the elaborate designs that they can produce.
  Recent studies suggest that weaver birds may be using mental skills  that are not dissimilar to those required to make simple tools.
  For weaver birds,  a well-built nest is a ticket to successful breeding.
  Who would imagine that such complexity  could be produced using just a foot and a beak?  Weaver birds make their elaborate nests from simple materials  they find around them.
  Another of nature's extraordinary builders  are the spiders.
  They make their complex webs  from an incredible substance they produce themselves, silk.
  Spider silk is unique.
  It's very thin, very strong,  and has many exciting potential uses.
  spiders spin it with ease,  but scientists have been trying to copy it for many years.
  To do that, we need to understand two of the spider's secrets.
  The exact structure and nature of their silk  and the way they transform it from a fluid into a thread.
  spider silk is a truly remarkable material.
  1t can withstand impact and it can be strong, stretchy,  and sticky all at the same time.
  spiders produce it from special glands inside their bodies  and extrude it from tiny nipples called spinnerets  at the back end of their abdomens.
  And what is more,  they can produce up to seven different kinds,  each with its own purpose.
  For centuries, it was the only silk known to man.
  The ancient Greeks used cobwebs to stop bleeding  and Australian Aborigines used it to catch small fish.
  Then, in the Far East,  a different and mysterious new kind of silk  started to appear and in much larger quantities.
  According to Chinese legend,  the first person to weave silk into a fabric  was the Empress Leizu back in the 2 7th century BC.
  She was having tea in her garden under a mulberry tree,  when a cocoon fell from the branch above  and dropped into her cup  and started to unravel.
  Whether that's true or not,  the Empress Leizu is now honoured as the goddess of silk,  and silk moth farming dates  back to the beginning of Chinese civilisation.
  The silk was traded right across the Near East  and into the Roman Empire.
  The Chinese traders were sworn to secrecy  about how this marvellous material was made.
  But in the year of 532,  the Roman emperor justinian managed to find out  that it came not, as some suspected, from a spider's web,  but from the cocoon of a moth.
  silk moth caterpillars produce large quantities of silk  and they make it in a very different way to spiders.
  The caterpillars feed voraciously on mulberry leaves  and then, when they're full-grown and ready to transform into a moth,  they spin silken cocoons in which they will pupate.
  Unlike spiders, which have specialised spinning organs,  silk moth caterpillars produce silk from their salivary glands.
  Each cocoon is made from a single unbroken filament  that can be over 500 metres long.
  This silk is plentiful and easy to spin commercially,  but it isn't as tough as spider silk.
  And spider silk also has more exciting potential uses.
  An orb web like this is constructed over a ''Y''-shaped scaffold  of silk threads, which are extremely strong.
  Unlike silkworms, the female spiders,  which spin the webs, are very territorial and aggressive.
  So farming it and collecting spider silk is very difficult,  but it has been done.
  1n 1 762, a spanish missionary called Termeyer  made a machine that held a single spider  from which he pulled a silken thread.
  1n London, Daniel Rolt,  a factory worker, attached spiders to a small steam machine  and succeeded in reeling out 1 8 metres of silk a minute.
  That led to machines  which are able to milk several spiders at a time.
  Experiments then stopped until 2004,  when two textile artists in Madagascar built a machine  based on these early designs  with which they made something very special indeed.
  The golden colour of this stunningly beautiful spider silk shawl  is completely natural.
  The silk from which it was made  was produced by 1 ,06 3,000 spiders,  like this one, over four years.
  Local people collected 3,000 spiders a day  and trained handlers extracted silk from groups of 24 at a time.
  After being milked,  the spiders were released back into the wild.
  The individual silk strands were then twisted into a thread,  which was woven into this intricately patterned fabric on looms.
  Now, this kind of silk fabric production couldn't work commercially.
  Apart from being hard work to make in quantity,  spider silk isn't really a very suitable thread for fabric.
  As a cloth, it reacts badly to moisture and heat,  but in its natural state as a single thread,  it has physical qualities that could be exploited medically.
  These special characteristics are the consequence  of the molecular structure of spider silk.
  1t consists of two large protein molecules.
  One is stretchy and spaghetti-like  and the other has a harder, crystalline structure.
  Combined, these two proteins give silk  unique qualities of strength and flexibility.
  spiders store these proteins as a gel-like liquid in their bodies.
  And when they need to make silk,  they extrude it through the spinnerets,  combining the molecules in a special way.
  1f we hold down a spider without harming it,  we can see this process in more detail.
  Normally, the spider would attach the end  of the silk filament to an object  and then move away,  so that the filament is pulled from her spinnerets.
  We can produce the same reaction  by gently pulling the end of the filament itself.
  Internally, the silk liquid is passing down a long duct  in which stretchy elements within the protein molecules  are aligned with harder crystalline ones  to create an extremely strong and tough thread.
  scanning electron microscopes  reveal how the liquid emerges from the spinnerets.
  1ncredibly, spiders can convert liquid proteins  into a hardened thread at room temperature  with very little energy.
  1f we could understand and copy this process,  it would be a major scientific breakthrough.
  scientists have, in fact, spent many years  trying to replicate the spider's liquid silk  and the way it's spun.
  Recently, the genes of spider silk proteins  were cloned and put into goats  to try and produce silk in their milk.
  1t worked and, when the goats had kids,  silk proteins were extracted from the mother's milk.
  But none of these processes have yet produced silk  that is as tough as natural spider silk.
  This machine is called a tensile tester  and it shows how strong and stretchy spider silk can be.
  This drag line silk is being pulled apart  and a graph shows the force the fibre is taking  and at what point it breaks.
  A steel thread of similar diameter would've broken by now.
  There, it's broken.
  Spider silk is the toughest natural material known to man.
  A single thread of web silk less than a millimetre thick  can absorb the impact of fast-moving prey  and bring it to a halt without breaking.
  Complete webs can stretch enormously  and then return to their original shape with a minimum of damage.
  1ncredibly, spiders can make this complex material  from just fresh air, flies and water.
  The best we can do in making a material like it  requires oil, chemicals, and a great deal of energy.
  Although we now better understand the structure of spider silk  and the natural spinning process,  we still can't perform the spider's magic  and copy this extraordinary substance.
  But using small amounts of natural spider silk in clever ways  has, nonetheless, a very exciting future.
  A sumptuous golden cloth is just one possible product.
  This is the dream that has become a reality  and shows just how lovely spider silk can be.
  But it also has the potential to make other dreams come true.
  1t's a biodegradable material  that we are now using to make artificial joints  and it may even help repair damaged spinal tissue.
  This curiosity of nature could eventually save lives.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life-cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myths and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities I find most fascinating of all.
   Animals are usually either male or female  and usually they behave in a way that is characteristic of their gender.
  But, in nature, there are always curious exceptions.
  Female hyenas behave and look like males.
  And male seahorses play mother and physically give birth.
  Only now are we beginning to understand  why these two animals seemed to have swapped their sexual identities.
  Seahorses are fascinating.
  Some are tiny and blend perfectly with their surroundings.
  Others can grow to an impressive 35 centimetres in size.
  They live in shallow waters, both tropical and temperate,  across much of the world  and have even been found in the Thames estuary near London.
  Seeing one for the first time is a moment to remember.
  They are magical creatures with a truly fantastic appearance.
  They have the head of a horse, eyes like a chameleon,  the prehensile tail of a monkey, armour that can change colour,  and, perhaps most strangely of all, a pouch.
  Their unusual features inspired their name, hippocampus,  a combination of two Greek words, hippo meaning "horse"  and campus meaning "sea monster.
"  For centuries, they've been considered animals of myth and legend.
  And only today are we unravelling the true story of males that give birth.
  Seahorses baffled early naturalists.
  Their unusual characteristics seem to make them misfits.
  But, after much debate, they were recognised as true bony fish.
  But their breeding habits were hardly fishy.
  Typically, female fish release large numbers of eggs into the sea  that males must quickly fertilise.
  But a fish that kept its eggs in a pouch seemed scarcely believable.
  The seahorse's striking appearance has given it an almost magical status.
  Images and stories of a creature part horse, part fish  have spanned the centuries across many cultures.
  Among the most famous are those belonging to Poseidon.
  This famous Greek god of the sea lived below the waves  and his golden chariot was pulled by a pair of giant hippocampi.
  The seahorses' odd behaviour appeared mysterious, too.
  As early as the 3rd century BC,  Aristotle noted in his book on the History of Animals  that pipefish, close relatives to the seahorse,  had a pouch that burst into two to release the young.
  These early observations of the pipefish's strange breeding behaviour  helped to reveal the true story of the male seahorse's mysterious pouch.
  Just like seahorses, pipefish carry their eggs around with them.
  Some species simply stick the eggs to the outside of their bodies.
  Others have a rudimentary pouch.
  These simpler techniques provide some clues  as to how seahorses developed their more complex, closed pouch.
  But what Aristotle didn't know when he spotted the pipefish giving birth  was that he was actually looking at a male.
  And this important detail was to remain undiscovered for hundreds of years.
  Although seahorses live in British waters,  until Victorian times, few people, apart from fishermen, had ever seen them.
  In 1859, a Mr Pinto brought four live seahorses back to London  from the mouth of the river Tagus in Portugal.
  Pinto endured a sleepless, seven-day train journey through Europe,  waking himself frequently to aerate the seahorses' water with a syringe.
  His seahorses survived and were installed in the new London Aquarium.
  They were an instant hit.
  Seahorses were headline news.
  Mr Pinto's journey and their arrival made the front pages.
  Now, they could be seen in great detail  and the study of their mysterious breeding began.
  In that same year, what was described as "a herd of baby seahorses"  was born in the British Midlands Aquarium.
  This caused quite a stir,  as did the discovery that it was the male that gave birth to the young.
  But why seahorses swapped parenting roles remained a mystery  and we're still searching for the answers today.
  Here at the London Zoo's Aquarium,  over 150 years since the arrival of the first seahorses,  a detailed study is revealing more about their reproduction  and the unusual role of the male.
  These tanks are set like a seahorse dating centre.
  The first port of call is the courtship aquarium or ballroom tank.
  Here, a number of adult seahorses spend time getting to know each other  as they look for compatible partners.
  Breeding seahorses form lasting partnerships as mating pairs,  and their long, elaborate courtship dances  are a way of finding and securing a suitable mate.
  Dances like those of this Australian species  can be complex and last several days.
  They help the couple synchronise their bodies  so that the male's pouch is ready for the eggs.
  They also help to establish the couple's joint territory.
  Seahorses were thought to be monogamous, but we now know that  some are only exclusive couples for the duration of the breeding season.
  The female must choose the right male  because she's going to pass over her precious eggs to him.
  Female seahorses do not have a pouch,  so a strong pair bond with a male is very important  as he will care for her eggs.
  This is the honeymoon tank.
  Seahorses that have shown an attraction for each other in the courtship tank  are removed as a couple and given their own private space.
  In the wild, each pair has its own territory  and these smaller tanks make captive breeding more successful.
  Here, the pair can synchronise their courtship.
  Timing is crucial.
  The female's eggs must be fully developed at exactly the same time  that the male's pouch is ready to receive them.
  Once the female's eggs are ready, she hydrates them with sea water.
  They must then be laid within 24 hours.
  She transfers her eggs to her partner  by inserting her egg-laying tube, or ovipositor, into the male's pouch.
  Once pregnant, the male attaches himself to one spot  and the female visits him every day.
  She checks to see when he'll be ready for her next batch of eggs.
  One theory suggests that, because the male is incubating the eggs,  the female has more time to feed,  and can put energy into making new eggs more quickly.
  Swapping roles may be a smart way to use their resources more efficiently.
  What goes on inside the pouch is still a mystery.
  The male may simply provide a closed incubator.
  Or the inner skin may develop extra blood vessels  to give a more placenta-like connection.
  It's not clear.
  During pregnancy and birth, the male's metabolism increases,  but that's little wonder, for he may have up to 1,500 eggs in his pouch.
  The male seahorse gives birth to dozens of miniature babies,  perfect in every detail.
  The free swimming young are put into separate crash tanks  where they can be fed and cared for.
  The parent seahorses in this biological hotel  remain in the honeymoon suite, ready to mate again.
  These are some of last year's youngsters and they've grown enormously.
  Next year, they'll be breeding themselves.
  Swapping the parental roles seems to work well for seahorses.
  In warm conditions, a male can give birth every 28 to 30 days.
  But of the thousands of fry produced each year, only a few survive.
  There is no safe creche in the open sea.
  To succeed, seahorse parents must work well together.
  Yet, in this partnership,  the female seems to have the freedom to swim, feed and patrol her territory  which is normally the prerogative of the male.
  So, is the male seahorse a slave to a gallivanting female?  Well, latest research suggests not  and shows that some males may have more control over breeding  than first thought.
  If small or poor quality eggs are deposited into their pouches,  some males will absorb them.
  Such males appear to be choosy about how they invest their time and energy.
  And some females, in entrusting their eggs to males, are being cheated.
  But the male seahorse can't be duped,  as having a pouch means that he can always be certain  that all the baby seahorses he gives birth to are his own.
  So, male and female seahorses have swapped their roles.
  The male is the mother and he gives birth to the babies.
  Another animal with unusual parenting habits is the hyena.
  Here it's the female that looks and behaves more like a male.
  Why have female hyenas become so masculine?  These are African spotted hyenas,  creatures that have an undeservedly bad reputation  and a very strange biology.
  In the wild, they live in clans of up to 80 individuals  and the females dominate the males.
  The females are big, aggressive and look physically almost exactly like males.
  Unravelling why the female is like this has not been easy  as it's difficult to tell the difference between the sexes.
  The females male appearance is made all the more convincing  by her reproductive organs.
  They're external and very similar to a male's.
  Understanding hyena biology has helped to explain the female's masculinity  and the species' reputation as aggressive scavengers.
  But in the past, these strange traits gave hyenas a very bad image.
  In the first century, Pliny the Elder  described the hyenas and did them a great disservice.
  This is what he wrote.
  "Hyenas are like a cross between a dog and a wolf.
  "They break everything with their teeth, swallow it with a gulp,  "and masticate it in the belly.
  "They are believed to become male and female in alternate years.
  "They can imitate the human voice, calling a shepherd by name  "so that he comes outside where they tear him to pieces.
  "Any animal that a hyena looks at three times will be unable to move.
"  That tainted image of hyenas was perpetuated for many years to come  and they were branded as evil, dangerous creatures.
  Hyenas are not, of course, evil.
  But their competitive nature and unusual eating habits make them appear fearsome.
  They're specialist feeders.
  They crush, eat and digest bones  that other creatures can't tackle and so leave behind.
  And this diet has a significant effect on the female's appearance  and her family relationships,  especially those with her cubs.
  In the early 19th century, an unusual discovery in Britain  excited one man to look more closely at the hyena's diet.
  In 1822,  a rather eccentric but very eminent geologist called William Buckland  made a significant discovery  that was to further the modern understanding of hyenas.
  Quarry workers in Kirkdale, Yorkshire  had come across a cave that contained a large number of bones.
  Buckland was very excited  and rushed to see the remains before they were disturbed any further.
  And he found that mud deposits in the cave  had preserved the bones of over 22 different species of animals  including tiger, bear, wolf, elephant and, significantly, hyenas,  which Buckland described as littering the cave like the bones in a dog kennel.
  This is one of the actual hyena jaws that Buckland found.
  It belonged to a young but ancient hyena.
  There are also a lot of these on the cave floor.
  They are coprolites, or fossilized faeces, from hyenas.
  They contain bone fragments  that have passed through the hyena's digestive tract  and so showed that they were successful bone crushers.
  Buckland's discovery of so many bones in what he believed to be a hyena's den  indicated that they were very successful hunters.
  Contrary to popular belief, they scavenge very little  and kill over 80% of their own food.
  A lone hyena can easily kill a wildebeest or a topi  and, with teamwork, they will tackle bigger animals, like zebra and giraffe.
  They do scavenge as well,  but it's more usual for lions to steal from hyenas  rather than the other way around.
  Female hyenas have become big and strong  and compete for food with other members of their clan.
  Nothing goes to waste.
 They can eat even the thickest of bones.
  Buckland was fascinated by the marks on the bones from the cave  but found it hard to believe that hyenas had made them.
  He wanted to be sure of his findings  and understand how their jaws,  with their strange, massive teeth, actually worked.
  Hyenas are African or Asiatic animals.
  So, Buckland's discovery of hyena bones in an English cave  was strange, to put it mildly.
  As a man of science, he wanted to confirm  that the skull he had collected from Kirkdale  was definitely from a hyena  and that it had made the marks on the many fractured bones.
  To try and prove his case,  he asked a friend, William Burchell, an African traveller,  to send a young hyena back to England from the Cape.
  He planned to kill it and compare its skull and teeth  with the specimens in the cave.
  The young hyena that arrived at the docks was already tame  and had become a great favourite with the sailors, who christened him Billy.
  Billy became quite a celebrity and was as tame as a pet dog.
  No one could bring themselves to sacrifice him for the sake of science.
  Instead, a search of British museums produced a hyena skull  and Billy's life was spared.
  Buckland was then able to compare the new and old skulls  and they matched.
  Billy also helped to clarify the fractures on the bones.
  He was fed ox bones.
  This was one.
  And Buckland compared it with one that was found in the cave  and they closely match.
  This ability to crack massive bones  explains why female hyenas look like bristling males.
  It's also tied up intricately with the relationship they have with their cubs.
  Cubs are born underground and are fed on their mother's rich milk.
  At about three months of age, they emerge from the den  and continue to suckle for almost another two years.
  Their mother helps feed the youngsters  as they can't yet crack and crush bones for themselves.
  Even at almost a year in age, when they're big enough to join the kill,  their teeth and jaws are still not sufficiently developed  to tackle big bones.
  The skull of a young hyena is quite different from that of an adult.
  It's got a flat top, narrow cheeks and relatively small teeth.
  An animal with a skull like this would not be able to crush and eat big bones.
  It takes almost three years for a young hyena's skull to grow to full size  and reach mechanical maturity.
  And this is the result.
  This skull has a large, vaulted forehead  that dissipates biting stress, carrying it away from the face.
  It's also got wide arches at its sides  for the attachment of powerful jaw muscles  and robust pre-molars that have specialised crack-resistant enamel.
  Jaws like these can crack the dense bones of zebra and even giraffe.
  Developing this substantial specialised eating equipment takes time.
  So it may be several years before a young hyena can feed independently.
  This puts pressure on their mothers to become dominant and aggressive.
  They need to fight to get enough food for their cubs.
  The female's status in the clan's hierarchy  will directly affect the survival of her young.
  The biggest, oldest, most established females are the most dominant  and take a bigger share of the kill.
  So food and the need to fight for it  has made females look and behave like aggressive males.
  But it has also had a strange side effect.
  Female hyenas have large amounts of the male hormone testosterone  and consequently develop male-like reproductive organs.
  This can be a problem.
  Having a long, thin birth canal makes mating very difficult  and both mothers and cubs sometimes die during birth.
  The female's strange gender swap  is one of the most unusual in the animal kingdom  and new science has now made sense of the old clues  and solved this mystery.
  Hyenas are very intriguing animals.
  William Buckland's early observations of their bones and his hyena experiments  started a study of these creatures that was to reveal their fascinating biology.
  Hyenas may have a frightening reputation  but their odd characteristics all have a reason.
  The story of their aggression and bizarre bodies  is intimately tied up with their food and the survival of their cubs.
  They've evolved a perfectly formed bone-breaking jaw,  but the time it takes to grow has resulted  in one of the most unusual but dedicated mothers in the animal kingdom.
  So, to become the best parents  female hyenas have become more male and male seahorses more motherly.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full of extraordinary animals  with amazing life histories.
  Yet certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  some of these creatures were surrounded by myth and misunderstandings  for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities 1 find most fascinating of all.
  some of our most familiar animals puzzled scientific minds  for a surprisingly long time.
  The mysterious comings and goings of barn swallows led  to some far-fetched ideas.
  While the life cycle of the painted lady butterfly took centuries to unravel.
  Swallows have successfully nested and raised their young in this barn  for several years.
  These chicks will soon leave the nest and make their first exploratory flights  around the farm.
  But in a few weeks' time, they will suddenly vanish.
  Where do they go to?  In the past, that gave rise to some extraordinary speculations.
  In fact, in the 1 8th century, it became a very long-running debate  headed by some well-known church figures.
  And swallows are not the only birds that appear and disappear  with the changing seasons.
  For centuries people speculated about where such birds go.
  One explanation was that some birds changed into others  by growing different adult plumage.
  Perhaps the redstart turned into a robin.
  Or the garden warbler into a blackcap.
  since these species were seldom present at the same time,  the explanation seemed entirely plausible.
  The barnacle goose was another mystery.
  Each winter, huge, noisy flocks of them appear on European shores,  apparently from out of nowhere.
  No one had ever seen them build a nest or raise young.
  The barnacle goose gave rise to some extraordinary folklore,  as this medieval illustration shows.
  It was thought that the geese grew on underwater trees,  starting life as small marine creatures called goose barnacles.
  Goose barnacles do, of course, exist.
 They're small, shelled marine organisms  with what looks like the head, which is in fact enclosed by a shell,  attached by a stalk, which was thought to resemble the neck of a bird,  to a bit of wood or a rock.
  The confusion about the nature of the barnacle goose  was put to good use by some.
  since it was unclear whether it was a bird, a fish, or some other creature,  you could surely be allowed to eat it on days when  meat was forbidden by the church.
  But the most commonly held belief  was that birds disappear in winter because they hibernated.
  swallows, and their close relatives, the swifts and martens,  were thought to do so in mud at the bottom of ponds and rivers.
  And it's easy to see how this idea originated because the birds spend  much of their time near water,  skimming low over the surface, hunting for insects or taking a drink.
  1t wasn't until the Middle Ages that another theory was proposed,  that some birds may migrate.
  And one of its strongest proponents was an influential religious leader.
  Frederick II of Hohenstaufen was a powerful Holy Roman Emperor  and known for his unorthodox views.
  He ignored the philosophy of the church  and based his knowledge of natural history  on direct observation, rather than what was ordained.
  Frederick was also a keen falconer, and he wrote this book, The Art of Falconry.
  And in it, surprisingly, there are entire chapters  on the migration of birds.
  His confidence came from the fact that, unlike his contemporaries,  and those before him, he had actually observed birds in the field for himself.
  He had no doubt about the migration and so little patience for the myths  surrounding the barnacle goose.
  He considered the story to be quite ridiculous  and argued that the birds simply breed in distant lands.
  His views started a debate that split people into two camps.
  Those believing in the old hibernation theory and those who supported the idea  that birds migrate.
  This was the start of a new era  which was to sweep away myths and focus instead on facts  and careful observation.
  And across Europe, the evidence for bird migration started to accumulate.
  1n Germany, a 1 2th-century monk is said to have taken a swallow from its nest  and attached a parchment note to its leg that read,  ''Oh, swallow, where do you live in winter?''  The following spring, the bird returned with a note saying, ''1n Asia.
  ''1n the home of Petrus.
 '' That is, 1srael.
  The story may not have been true, but it certainly gave the right hint.
  In the early 1 6th century, a bishop from Sweden called Olaus Magnus  reignited the debate about swallows with this picture.
  He claimed that in winter, fishermen often drew up swallows in their nets  hanging together in a mass.
  This astonishing assertion provided ample fuel for the anti-migration lobby.
  And, unlikely as it was, the view that swallows spent their winters underwater  became increasingly entrenched.
  By the 1 8th century, the debate about migration versus hibernation  had come to a head.
  And, across the continent, opinions were divided.
  But new evidence was about to come from an unusual source.
  Edward Jenner was an English country doctor who also had a deep interest  in natural history.
  He noted that although swallows often splash in water as they skim across it,  they never immerse themselves.
  Were they to do so, he suggested, their wings would become so wet  that they would be unable to fly.
  To test his idea,Jenner reportedly held a swift underwater for two minutes.
  Not surprisingly, it died.
  jenner went on to devise another experiment  to discover where the birds go.
  He took 1 2 swifts from their nests and marked them  by taking off two of their claws.
  The following year, some of the birds he'd marked were caught again in exactly  the same spot.
  Although jenner could not discover where his swifts had been over the winter,  he was the first to show that they returned to use the same breeding sites  in the following years.
  And we now know that this is true for swallows as well.
  About the same time, across the Channel, a German bird enthusiast  had come up with a similar idea.
  johann Frisch caught several birds near his house and attached to their legs  woollen threads like this, which he'd dipped in red watercolour.
  He predicted that if swallows really did spend the winter  at the bottom of lakes,  the red colour would be washed off.
  The following spring, Frisch's swallows returned and the threads were unchanged.
  It was a very simple, but very effective experiment.
  Evidence against the hibernation theory continued to mount.
  And, eventually, a new technique put the final nail in its coffin,  systematic bird ringing.
  This bird has just been fitted with its own individual marker,  a small metal ring on its leg  with a unique code of numbers.
  It's part of a national scheme that's been running for over 1 00 years.
  And provides scientists with invaluable data on bird movements.
  Early in the 20th century, the study of migration really took off.
  Birds were recovered on their breeding and wintering grounds,  and often en route, too.
  six hundred years after Frederick Von Hohenstaufen had first  started the debate, real evidence was beginning to accumulate.
  In the summer of 1 91 1 , a metal ring just like this one was clipped onto the leg  of a young swallow in Staffordshire.
  The number on the ring was B830.
  Eighteen months later, the same bird was caught by a farmer in South Africa.
  Here, at last, was the indisputable proof that swallows migrate  and spend the winter thousands of miles away.
  Off you go.
 There we are.
  Today, of course, we know that the swallow's migration is one of the most  impressive in all the animal kingdom.
  1t takes it across the largest desert in the world, the sahara.
  1t's a gruelling and dangerous journey,  and many die on the way from exhaustion or starvation.
  They travel for nearly four months,  covering nearly 1 0,000 kilometres and eventually reach southern Africa.
  And bird ringing also helped to dispel the myth of the barnacle goose.
  1n the 1 960s, a Norwegian expedition ringed geese  nesting on the Arctic island of spitzbergen.
  That autumn, some of the same birds were sighted on the west coast of scotland,  some 2,000 kilometres away.
  Frederick Von Hohenstaufen had been proved to be absolutely correct.
  It took centuries to discover the truth behind the swallows' seasonal movements.
  But, in their time, they baffled the minds of many great naturalists.
  And started one of the longest running of all scientific debates.
  But, in the end, the true story proved to be even more extraordinary  than the fantastic myths that were invented to explain it.
  Just like the swallow, the painted lady butterfly seems to appear  magically out of nowhere.
  And that started some extraordinary ideas and controversies.
  The painted lady is one of our largest butterflies  and a familiar summer visitor to our gardens.
  And yet its appearance and disappearance each year has puzzled us for centuries.
  It's only now that we're beginning to understand its extraordinary life cycle  and discover where it vanishes each year.
  Early naturalists were confused by the sudden appearance of painted ladies  each spring, because they were unaware of the connection between butterflies  and caterpillars.
  For a very long time, it was widely believed that butterflies arise  from rotting material by what was called spontaneous generation.
  In the 1 830s, a German scientist named Renous  was arrested for heresy for claiming that he could change caterpillars  into butterflies.
  Arresting someone for something now known to be common knowledge  may seem rather extreme.
  But, at the time, many still believed that caterpillars and butterflies  were completely different creatures, created by the hand of God.
  Needless to say, people had been well aware of the existence of both  butterflies and caterpillars since the earliest times.
  But the thought that any two were related, let alone the same species,  seemed impossible.
  And it's easy to see why.
  Not only do caterpillars and butterflies  look like very different types of animals,  but the colours and patterns of a caterpillar don't match up  with those of its adult form.
  The only way to know which larva and which butterfly go together  is to keep caterpillars and watch them turn into butterflies.
  But it wasn't until the 1 7th century that anyone left a record of doing that.
  One of the first was a remarkable woman named Maria Sibylla Merian.
  Merian was born in Germany  at a time when women still had little formal education,  and no role in the scientific world.
  But she was an accomplished artist  and painted plants and insects she saw around her.
  To do that, she kept caterpillars, fed them on leaves  and watched them turn into butterflies.
  Merian produced hundreds of beautiful paintings of butterflies in their stages  of development, along with the plants on which they feed.
  Her drawings are so exquisite and detailed that they still rank among  the best in the world.
  Among the things she observed with great care were things like this.
  A curious, yet strangely beautiful object.
  1t's a chrysalis.
  The intermediate stage between a caterpillar and a butterfly.
  she was one of the first to record the remarkable change that takes place  in the chrysalis.
  1t's one of nature's most extraordinary transformations.
  At the age of 52, she sailed from Europe to South America  on a two-year expedition to study insects in the tropical jungles  of Suriname.
  It was an exceptional journey for any naturalist at the time,  and particularly for a woman.
  When she returned, she produced this beautiful book.
  It turned out to be popular, because it was one of the few to be published  not in the scientific language of Latin, but in Dutch.
  Because of this, her work was largely dismissed by scientists of the time.
  But Merian was one of the first naturalists to correctly connect  the caterpillar with its pupa and the adult form.
  Today, Merian's book is widely recognised as a pioneering work  of scientific observation.
  And it put an end to the idea of spontaneous generation.
  Around the same time, further evidence for the connection between butterflies  and caterpillars came from a different source.
  In 1 669, a Dutch scientist by the name of jan Swammerdam  published the results of experiments which would finally prove  that the caterpillar and butterfly are one and the same animal.
  Swammerdam was a master of the miniature and dissected the caterpillars and pupae  of butterflies and moths under a microscope.
  With a steady hand and endless patience, he carefully cut into the layers of skin  with tiny scissors and what he discovered was truly astonishing.
  He found some of the body parts of a butterfly.
  The structures were fragile and not complete, but swammerdam had proved  that caterpillar and butterfly are indeed one and the same animal.
  We now know that without the caterpillar there can be no butterfly.
  Yet for a very long time, the painted lady seemed to be an exception.
  Every spring, the adult butterflies would appear across Britain,  without any sightings of their caterpillars.
  While some butterflies hibernate in Britain,  there was no sign of painted ladies doing so.
  some speculated that they flew to warmer climates,  as birds do.
  But how could a tiny insect cross the English Channel?  1n the 20th century, swarms of butterflies moving across Europe  finally provided evidence that painted ladies do indeed cross the sea.
  And they were found to fly all the way from North Africa to Britain.
  But there were almost no records of painted ladies making  the reverse trip south.
  so, for years, it was thought that Britain must be a dead end  for the most northerly stragglers.
  And then, in 2009, the public was asked to help solve the mystery.
  Among 1 2,000 sightings, there were reports of painted ladies  flying out to sea in the autumn.
  And a radar station detected them flying south at heights of 500 metres,  way beyond the sight of human eyes.
  We now know that the painted ladies' migration  is a round trip of over 1 2,000 kilometres.
  But it's not made by any one individual.
  Each only flies part of the way, passing on the migratory battle  to the next generation.
 1t's like a relay race,  with up to six generations of butterflies involved.
  The painted ladies' epic journey from one continent to the next,  would be a truly astonishing feat for any animal.
  But for a tiny creature like this, it seems really extraordinary.
  How does it battle the wind and the weather,  and navigate across vast bodies of water?  And with no single individual ever undertaking the whole migration,  how do they find the way?  1t seems that painted ladies are pre-programmed  to either fly north or south.
  And this is determined whilst they're still caterpillars,  possibly by temperature and day length.
  And also by the plants they feed on.
  But how does this information get passed on from caterpillar to butterfly?  The answer may be hidden within the chrysalis.
  Recently, CTscanners have allowed us to look inside a pupa.
  They reveal that some organs remain intact during the transformation.
  A one-day-old pupa clearly shows the gut and breathing tubes  which only change slightly as the chrysalis develops.
  Could it be that the brain or nerves also remain intact  and that memories are passed on?  Recent experiments in the lab appear to support this idea.
  scientists taught caterpillars to avoid specific smells  by linking them with an unpleasant reaction.
  Later on, as adults, the same individuals remembered these smells  and chose to keep away from them.
  1f the experiences of a caterpillar can be carried over to the adult,  then maybe cues for migration can also be passed on.
  Although we've unravelled much of the painted ladies' life cycle,  many questions remain.
  How far does each individual travel?  And do offspring follow similar routes to their ancestors?  One day, we may know the answers.
 But, for now,  they remain some of the unsolved mysteries of nature.
  The arrival each spring of our painted lady butterflies and our swallows  never ceases to delight us.
  But now we also understand the extraordinary journeys they undertake  when they disappear again at the end of summer.
 
                    1   The natural world is full of extraordinary animals, with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle,  or the strange biology of the emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myths  and misunderstandings for a very long time.
  And some have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals, that stand out from the crowd.
  The curiosities I find particularly fascinating.
  Some animals can perform amazing physical feats.
  A flea's jump is said to be the equivalent of a man  leaping over St.
Paul's Cathedral.
  And it's famously quoted, that cheetahs  can run at speeds of 70 miles an hour.
  But are these claims really true?  Quick.
 Look  This is a real, live, flea circus,  and you can see this one, pulling along this tiny chariot.
  There are very few circuses like this, these days.
  The whole business of performing fleas,  dates back into the 16th century, and it was used by watchmakers.
  They used them, to demonstrate how they  themselves could work on a near-miniature scale.
  They used thin gold wires, to harness fleas,  and then link the fleas to tiny chains.
  Early magnifying devices like this  where actually named "flea glasses", after these pests.
  And the fleas where excellent creatures  to demonstrate a newly visible, microscopic world.
  Fleas appear to be extraordinarily strong,  after all, this little flea here,  pulling this chariot,  was an extraordinary thing.
  That's the equivalent of me, trying to pull a jumbo jet single-handed.
  And this tiny merry-to-round, that too, is completely powered by fleas.
  The secret of the flea's strength and ability, to move such equipment,  lies in their powerful walking and jumping techniques.
  They have the ability, to store and then release energy,  and that enables them to leap upwards, with great acceleration.
  Fleas need to be good jumpers.
  They live on the skin of mammals and birds, sucking their blood.
  So they have to be able, to quickly leap on board  their traveling hosts, when they get the chance.
  There are more than 2,500 species worldwide,  62 or which, live in Britain.
  Fortunately, only a few feed on us.
  Rat fleas were said to be responsible,  for the spread of the black death, in 1665,  which killed millions.
  But it wasn't until the invention of the magnifying glass,  that we were able to see these tiny creatures, face to face.
  In 1665, Robert Hooke,  an inventor and natural philosopher  made one of the first compound microscopes.
  This is a later reproduction of it.
  And he then published his discoveries,  that he made, using it,  in a marvelous book, called "Micrographia ".
  It became one of the first scientific best-sellers.
  Samuel Pepys mentioned it in his diary.
  And it contained magnificent, detailed drawings,  that revealed biological structures, that had never been seen before.
  He saw that plant tissue, was made up of  little units, that he called cells.
  The word we still use.
  And he drew this marvelously detailed flea,  showing its great, strikingly long legs.
  He also watched it through the microscope,  and he described, how a flea jumped.
  This is what he says:  "When the flea intends to leap",  "he folds up these 6 legs together"  "then springs them all out, at the same instant"  "and thereby exerting his whole strength at once,"  "carries his little body, to a considerable distance.
"  Indeed it does.
  A flea's jump, takes just 1/1000th of a second.
  So Hooke, must have had very sharp eyesight to see it.
  Many researchers have been fascinated by fleas,  and for one particular family, they became an obsession.
  Charles Rothschild, a banker and keen naturalist,  amassed over 30,000 specimens,  and identified more than 500 new species.
  He purchased them from specialist traders, world wide.
  and one parcel from America, had a special surprise.
  The tiny fleas were dressed as Mexicans.
  Miriam, Charles' daughter, shared his passion for fleas,  and catalogued his whole collection.
  She looked closely at the flea's body  and the way they jumped,  and was puzzled to find, that they could leap far higher  then should theoretically have been possible.
  But could their reputation for jumping 200 times  their body length, possibly be true.
  Most of the natural world's top jumpers  achieve their impressive leaps,  by using straightforward muscle power.
  Kangaroos can make single bounds, of almost 8 meters.
  And frogs are able to jump  more than 20 times their body length.
  The jumping spider's leap is even more impressive,  100 times its own length.
  It achieves this, by exploiting hydraulics.
  And scientists had long suspected,  that fleas, and other insects,  also needed something other than muscle,  to make their huge jumps.
  In the 1960's an exciting discovery was made  in the insect world, that helped explain,  how bigger flying insects, like locusts and dragonflies  were able to fly and jump so well.
  A rubbery protein was found in the hinges  and joints of locust wings and legs.
  Using ultra-violet light, it's possible to see it,  as in this picture of a leg joint, of a locust.
  Here, that blue, is this new substance.
  But, just like this rubber, it could bend,  and then, release energy.
  But the newly discovered material did that,  with more than 90 percent efficiency.
  Remarkably too, it repeatedly snapped  back into shape, without any deformation.
  It was named: Resilin.
  This stretchy protein allows insects, to bend their stiff  bodies and stretch their tendons, without snapping.
  It's so robust, it lasts a lifetime,  and it's believed to be the most  efficient elastic protein known.
  The discovery of Resilin, opened up a whole new area of study.
  And in 1966, Henry Bennet-Clark,  an expert in insect bio-mechanics,  had a break-through moment.
  He had the chance, to see some exciting new footage of fleas,  shot on a newly invented high-speed camera.
  Bennet-Clark studied the new flea footage, and build  a mechanical model, 400 times bigger than the flea.
  He calculated, that the fleas were somehow generating  much more power, than their muscles could actually provide.
  He noticed, that just before leaping,  the flea bent the closed segment, of its hind-most legs,  towards the body, and hesitated for about 1/10th of a second.
  Carefully, he dissected fleas, and found a pad material.
  And that proved to be Resilin.
  He proposed, that fleas stored some of the energy for their jumps,  in this rubber-like tissue, and then released it,  as they pushed off, with their shins and feet.
  So the tiny wingless fleas, use internal Resilin springs,  like those of other bigger, flying and jumping insects.
  And the secret of their huge leaps,  lies in the efficient way, they combine muscle,  tendons and joints, to harness the resilin's energy.
  Only today, do we know how a flea jumps, and how high it can jump.
  Just as in Hooke's time, a modern technology, a microscope,  enabled him to see the anatomy of the flea, for the very first time,  so, we have a camera now, which is recording 5,000 images a second,  which enable us to see how it jumps.
  The camera is already running.
  The flea is in that little box, there.
  And we can see the image from the camera, on this computer.
  I will stop it, as soon as I see, the flea has jumped.
  There.
  Its legs are already cocked in the jumping position,  and the cuticle which has fused the Resilin,  is bent, and ready to release its energy,  and then, it lifts itself from the ground, and it's catapulted into the air.
  Our story about fleas started 350 years ago,  with Robert Hooke's first microscopic study.
  Today, images from electron microscopes  reveal even more details, than Hooke's beautiful drawings.
  They show the rough hairs, on the flea's shins and toes,  that help it grip, before thrusting itself into the air  with a final push from its toes.
  So, can fleas jump 200 times their own body length?  It would seem not.
  Nonetheless, they can leap a respectable 38 times  the length of their bodies, which is not bad.
  Fleas are extraordinarily strong.
  And we now know how they jump.
  The flea's story isn't quite over.
  A new discovery has added a twist to their lives,  and dispelled another myth.
  Recently, bodies of people, who died of the black death,  were uncovered by workers, digging a new railway line.
  This inspection revealed, that the black death was an airborne disease,  and had nothing to do with rats, or their fleas.
  So, the flea's good name can at last be  restored, and we can celebrate them,  as one of the natural world's  most spectacular jumpers.
  Next, meet an animal that performs another amazing feat.
  The Cheetah,  that, they say, can run at over 70 miles an hour.
  Fleas can't jump as high as some say,  but they can make extraordinary leaps.
  Next, we investigate another amazing claim.
  The Cheetah's ability to run at speeds of 70 miles an hour.
  Is that really possible?  Cheetahs are beautiful, athletic looking cats  They've got a streamlined body, small head,  elongated legs, narrow shoulders  and a very long spine.
  This looks like an animal, that's build for speed.
  But exactly how fast can he run?  They've been admired for their grace and speed, since antiquity.
  The Egyptians were sometimes buried with these cats,  because they believed, that they could hasten the journey to the after-world.
  And in more recent times, sports hunters  have used cheetahs, to run down their prey.
  So, the cheetah certainly has an impressive sprint.
  But where did the magical figure of 70 miles an hour come from?  Back in 1957, a cheetah hit the headlines  with news of a rather unusual experiment.
  A photographer, called Kurt Severin  filmed and measured the running speed of a tame cheetah  using an upturned bicycle, rather like this.
  The back wheel was modified,  so that a strong fishing line  could be wound through the rim  and pull along a meat scented bag.
  As the cheetah ran the 80 yard, or 73 meter course,  the pedals of the bike were hand-cranked as fast as humanly possible,  to drag the bag along, just ahead of the cheetah.
  The measurements were made manually,  using a stopwatch and a pistol.
  Severin wrote, that from a deep crouch,  the cheetah spurted to the end of the course, in 2,25 seconds,  for an average speed of 71 miles an hour.
  So, the legend was born.
  This impressive figure was immediately accepted,  and is still often quoted today.
  But how accurate is it?  The top speed of any running mammal,  depends on the power of its muscles,  and the strength of its tendons and bones.
  Human athletes train hard, to reach their personal best,  but there's still a limit to how fast they can run.
  In a 100 meter sprint, a mere 2 seconds  separates a good amateur sprinter,  from a world class champion.
  The greyhound is similar in size and shape, to a cheetah,  so it's a good substitute animal,  to test out the cheetah's legendary top speed  of 70 miles an hour.
  Their backs flex and extend so greatly,  that at times, none of their feet touch the ground.
  But when the greyhound's top speed was measured,  it was found to be 45 miles an hour;  a whole 25 miles an hour  slower than the cheetah.
  People argued, that the cheetah could nonetheless achieve  a bigger stride, because of extra flexibility in its back.
  The doubts about its top speed, were beginning to creep in.
  A new, more accurate way of testing, was needed.
  Here in the Royal Veterinary College,  they use dogs, to help them in their studies of cheetahs.
  Using a lurcher as a stand-in,  they've developed an extraordinary, data collecting collar.
  It has a GPS attachment, that will register  position, to within a fraction of a meter.
  It has movement sensors, to show  how the animal is in fact moving.
  It can be remotely programmed,  and it has a solar charged battery,  that will last for up to a year.
  The collars were tested and perfected,  on lurchers in Britain  to make sure that they were small and light enough,  no to disturb their wearer.
  Then the collars were put on captured cheetahs,  to see if they could cope with the twisting, while at the hung.
  The results were excellent,  and the collars were ready for the ultimate test:  in the wild.
  Here was a chance, to see if a wild cheetah's special adaptations to hunting,  really enabled it, to run at 70 miles an hour.
  Wild cheetahs are faster than other larger cats, like lions,  because of their lighter bones.
  An advantage in the short, high-speed chase.
  They have big nostrils, so they can take in large amounts of oxygen,  and an enlarged heart and longs, that increase circulation.
  Their long tails act like rudders, to help them steer,  and assist their balance as they twist and turn.
  They need to be fast and maneuverable, because the prey they hunt  is extremely agile and able to change direction very quickly.
  A cheetah can mirror such changes of movements in an instant.
  But what would the GPS-collars tell us, about their speed?  Data from the collars, has revealed fascinating details about cheetahs lives,  How they hunt, and exactly how fast they can run.
  The GPS measurements collected, are accurate to within half a meter,  and can be precisely matched to satellite images of the area.
  So, it's possible to see exactly what kind  of terrain, the cheetahs were hunting on.
  Here, we can see an 11-hour day in the life of a cheetah,  and there, it starts to hunt.
  The cheetah ran in one circular direction, like this.
  The blue represents deceleration, getting slower here,  and there, the red, where it gets faster and accelerates.
  And the arrows, represent the power of the force  on the cheetah's body, as it swirls.
  And there, finally, it made the kill.
  367 hunts were studied, and the top speed of  a chase, was calculated to be 58 miles an hour.
  For more than half a century, we have  overestimated the cheetah's speed.
  It is nonetheless, still the fastest animal on land,  and it's greatest feat, is its acceleration.
  Four times that, of Usain Bolt.
  The cheetah's legendary, 70 miles an hour,  speed record, is just a myth.
  But their true top speed of 58 miles  an hour, is still extraordinary.
  A body, that is fine tuned for hunting  helps them run, in a really remarkable way.
  But the cheetah's real impossible feat, so-called,  is the ability to change speed so extremely quickly.
  And that makes it one of the most maneuverable animals alive.
  Aren't you? Aren't you.
  We may have overestimated the abilities of the flea, and the cheetah.
  But both exhibit remarkable feats of acceleration, in their quest for food.
  The flea, to hop on to a passing host,  and the cheetah, to outmaneuver its prey.
 
                    1   The natural world is full of extraordinary  animals, with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle,  or the strange biology of the Emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myth  and misunderstandings, for a very long time.
  And some, have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals, that stand out from the crowd,  The curiosities, I find particularly fascinating.
  Orang-utans have an extraordinary ability to use tools.
  But the full extend of their skills, remained undiscovered for centuries.
  Surprisingly, crows also make tools.
  How and why have these two very different animals become so inventive?  When I first saw Orang-utans, that had been raised in captivity,  using tools, I was truly astonished.
  They were extraordinarily skillful, at imitating the things we do.
  But at the time, such skills had never  been observed among wild Orang-utans.
  So, are these apes just clever mimics,  or do they ever make, and use tools in the wild?  We didn't know the answers to such questions, until quite recently.
  This dramatic sculpture, by the  French artist Emmanuel FrÃ©miet,  entitled: An Orang-utan strangling a Borneo native,  represented the image, people had of this formidable giant ape.
  It's pretty accurate, as FrÃ©miet studied live  Orangs at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris,  and you can see, why Orangs are so called.
  The name in Malay means, Orang - people and utan - of the forest.
  At first, Orang-utans were feared and misunderstood.
  Early explorers thought, that these long-armed, tree-living apes,  were degenerate human beings.
  And for centuries, their true nature and  behaviour in the wild, was largely unknown.
  Orang-utans are only found in the rainforests of Indonesia.
  One population in Borneo, and another,  slightly different one, in the island of Sumatra to the west.
  They have strong, dextrous hands and feet,  and a very mobile mouth,  that enable them, to break open and eat the fruits, on which they depend.
  But although they are clearly very intelligent,  the only tools they seemed to use were sticks,  which they wielded, in a very simple way.
  Yet, in Africa, chimpansees had been seen,  using tools in a rather more complex fashion.
  Back in 1871, Darwin had reported, wild chimpansees,  cracking open walnut-like fruits with stones.
  And in the 1960's they were even seen modifying  sticks, with which they fished for termites.
  It seems strange, that while wild chimps use tools in a quite  complicated way, Orang-utans, apparently did not.
  Orangs, unlike chimps, are not very sociable.
  Individuals are largely solitary.
  The males have large, individual territories,  within which, several females have their own home ranges.
  This, more solitary way of life, affects they way  orangs share their knowledge and develop their skills.
  The most social time of an Orang-utan's life is, when it's a baby.
  And in the wild, youngsters stay with their mothers,  for the first 6 years of their lives.
  During this time, they learn the skills needed,  to survive in the forest alone.
  They need to know how to climb, and build nests,  And how to solve problems, such as breaking into tough food.
  And their large brains serve them, to help them, to master these tasks.
  So, a young Orang behaves like its mother,  and copies the way she searches for food and prepares it to eat.
  In captivity, they readily make tools,  to reach food, or to escape from their enclosures.
  They're clearly very inventive, and good at  developing ways, to solve particular problems.
  So, it was a puzzle, as to why such bright and capable apes  were apparently not behaving in a similar way in the wild.
  Orangs are clever, and physically dextrous.
  They've very strong jaws and mobile hands and feet,  and in the wild, they can reach and prize open most food.
  It was assumed for many years, that even though they used tools  in captivity, they didn't perhaps need to do so, in the wild.
  It seems that, strangely, these great apes, have more skills,  than they normally need, for their lives in the wild.
  It wasn't until 1964, that orangs were studied in detail.
  A Lithuanian scientist from Canada, called BirutÃ© Galdicas,  settled in Borneo, to live alongside these great apes.
  For over 30 years, she watched both tame orangs  and wholly wild ones, in the forests.
  In her camp, she found that the tame ones quickly discovered  how to use tools, in a relatively sophisticated way.
  But in the wild, she only saw them build nests  and use sticks, in a simple fashion.
  That picture of the character and abilities of orangs,  remained unchanged for a long time.
  Then, in 1994, our understanding of orangs changed radically.
  A group of Swiss scientists observed some orangs,  that were behaving very differently.
  They lived several hundred miles away, from their Borneo cousins,  in swampy rainforests, on the island of Sumatra.
  The orang's diet is about 90 percent fruit,  and this is one of their favorites.
  It's a durian, and it's well known   .
.
for it's pungent smell.
  As you can see, it's got a very spiky case.
  But orangs are able to break it open  and reach the soft, pulpy flesh inside.
  But its when they tackle another, similar spiky fruit,  called nisia, which is more difficult to open,  the scientists got their first glimpse of orangs making tools.
  Nisia presents an extra challenge, because  inside it contains rich, nutritious seeds,  which are embedded in a mass of sharp, needle-like hairs.
  To avoid catching these irritating hairs,  the swamp-living orangs slid sticks  in the cracks in the fruit's husks.
  Then they push them up and down,  to flick out the hairs and free the seeds.
  They also modified sticks,  so that they fitted different sized cracks in the fruits.
  The particular fruit, that grew in these wet forests,  had stimulated the Sumatran orangs, to make a new special tool.
  Unusually for such solitary creatures,  they gathered at these rich feeding areas in a group.
  And feeding close to one another, they share their skills.
  So now it was realised, that orangs were not just mimics.
  They were able to invent their own ways,  of making and using tools, just like chimps.
  We have long known, that captive orangs  can quickly work out ways, to solve problems.
  And now, it was clear, that wild orangs are no different.
  In recent years, they've been seen, using sticks,  to fish for termites and honey, in much the same way  as individuals do in captivity.
  In the flooded forests, many insects are  forced above ground to live in tree holes.
  So the orangs use sticks, to extract them.
  It seems incredible, that tool-using wild orangs  took hundreds of years to discover.
  In fact, it has been happening all the time,  just hidden away from view.
  These red men and women of the forest,  have very dextrous hands and feet,  strong jaws, and a large brain.
  In the wild, they have little need for complex tools,  and being solitary means, that tool use  is not usually shared or spread.
  But even as loners, they are inventive  and can work out how to solve problems.
  Here is a creature, that could be  one of the greatest tool users in the animal kingdom.
  Next, we meet the crows,  a family of clever birds,  with a knack for solving tricky problems.
  Orang-utans make and use quite simple tools.
  And crows make tools too.
  How and why have crows become so inventive?  The most famous members of the crow family in Britain,  are the ravens, that live here, in the Tower of London.
  By tradition, they protect The Crown.
  And they are recruited, and indeed dismissed,  from the British Army, just like soldiers.
  In 1986, one of them, called George,  had to be exiled to Wales, for persistent bad behaviour  in destroying the television aerials around here.
  And more recently, another one, noticing  that one of its fellows had died  and was attracting a great deal of attention,  also laid down on the ground, feigning death.
  And when the Raven Master came over to see  what the matter was, he got a sharp peck.
  Well, stories like those suggest,  that members of the crow family  have minds, rather different from other birds.
  Ravens are cheeky, self-aware, and socially intelligent.
  They are part of the big crow family, which in Britain includes:  Hooded and Carrion crows, Jackdaws,  Jays, Choughs and Magpies.
  Their brains are twice as large as other birds,  and relative to body size, comparable to a chimpanzee's  This extra brain capacity, has helped them  become very good at solving problems.
  Here is Bran, the raven.
  And I put a screen in front of his cage,  so he can't see what's going on.
  And this is Bran's stone.
  He's had it, since he was a chick,  and he can recognize it,  amongst a whole pile of other pebbles.
  Now, I've put a few, of a similar size, on this grid.
  And I'll put his stone just there.
  And now, we'll see, whether he can find it.
  Bran, where's your stone?  Immediately.
 Well done.
 Hahaha.
  The only explanation of this is    that he has an extremely acute visual memory.
  Indeed he has.
  You could say, that by putting stones  on a gridded square like that,  makes each one very obvious.
  Alright, well, let's make things a little more difficult.
  This is his stone,  and I'll put it in this.
.
 .
.
pile of stones,  so that he can only see just a little tip of it.
  Now Bran, where's your stone ?  Oh, come on.
 Hahahahaha.
  Fantastic.
 Thank you very much.
  And this ability, to recognize a little, small detail,  is used by these birds, when they cash food.
  In the good times, they will hide  hundreds of different pieces of food,  and conceal them, and remember every one.
  And come back to it, in the hard times,  to pick up that piece of food.
  Extraordinary.
  You're an amazing bird, Bran.
  Another species of crow, Clark's nutcracker,  is a champion of cashing food.
  It collects and hides up to 33,000 seeds every season,  and remembers where each one is put, for up to nine months.
  It can even find them under snow.
  Crows also remember the kind of food, that they have hidden.
  Freshly buried grubs, perish quickly,  so need to be recovered sooner than seeds.
  The ability to think ahead, and anticipate future events  can also help in other situations.
  Other birds will steal buried food, if they can find it.
  but some kind of crows are able to recognize these thieves, and outwit them.
  Recent research at Cambridge, has revealed that Scrub Jays  take great care, in how they hide their food.
  One jay is given the choice of two locations in which to cash food.
  Under stones, which make a noise if they are moved,  or soil, which can be cleared away quietly.
  In the case next-door, another scrub jay watches.
  He is a potential thief.
  When the cashing jay knows, that its neighbour can see,  it buries its food under stones.
  If the jay next-door attempts to steal that buried food,  the noisy stones will act like a burglar alarm.
  But when a screen is added, so that the  neighbouring jay, can only hear what's happening,  the cashing jay changes its plan.
  This time, it decides to bury its food under soil,  which makes hardly any noise, so its location  remains unknown to the jay next-door.
  For centuries, members of the crow family  have been recognised to be unusual birds.
  Their noisy gatherings gave them a sinister reputation.
  But their intelligence was legendary.
  In one of Aesop's Fables, a clever crow  drops pebbles into a jug of water,  to raise the level high enough, so that it can drink.
  This is perhaps one of the first recorded  examples, of a crow using a tool.
  Here, once again, is Bran the raven.
  And like the crow in Aesop's Fable,  he is extremely intelligent, and clever, at collecting food.
  I'm gonna set him a problem, which he has seen before,  and for which, he produced his own solution.
  I'm going to take a little bit of meat,  put it in this plastic bottle,  and then, just to make it difficult for him,  I'm gonna crush the bottle  so that it won't come out, just by shaking it.
  Now then Bran,  how are you gonna get that out?  Hahaha hahaha  What he did,  was to take this bottle,  put it in the water, and use  the water to swill it out  and take the bit, and he did  that in about 10 seconds flat.
  Bran, in effect, used the water as a tool.
  And he is very quick, to understand the potential of any object  and work out how it might help solve one of his problems.
  All crows, it seems, have extraordinary memories,  acute vision and great ingenuity in devising tools.
  In New Caledonia, a tropical island, east of Australia,  wild crows use tools, just as expertly and inventively as apes.
  They fashion sticks, to tease grubs out from places  they would otherwise find impossible to reach.
  More recently, scientists discovered and filmed crows,  that had taken their toolmaking a stage further.
  They were creating hooks, by carefully  modifying the thick ends of twigs.
  This seemed extraordinary.
  But there were more surprises.
  On the nearby island of Grand Terre,  the crows were making even more sophisticated implements.
  These are the actual tools,  made by New Caledonian crows.
  They're constructed from the leaves of the Pandanus tree,  which have lines of sharp spikes,  along their margins.
 And the crows use them,  to winkle insects out of crevices.
  But each population of these crows,  makes the tool in their own way.
  This one is a broad strip,  This one, a very thin strip.
  And these two, which come from the north of the island,  are used by two different populations.
  One, makes a two-step,  tool, thin at the end,  and this one, makes a one - two - three step tool.
  In this rare footage, the crow strips off the serrated edge of a leaf.
  The series of small spines are better than just a single hook  because they can snag an insect along all its length.
  Each population of the crows, have their own design,  which they pass on, to the next generation.
  So, just like us, these New Caledonian crows,  have their own cultures.
  Their own inquisitive, curious minds.
  Which is pretty unusual, for a bird.
  Orang-utans in the wild, make very simple tools.
  But surprisingly, it's the smart crows  that take the prize, for making the most sophisticated tools used by any animal.
  Very clever.
  Are we finished now?  Where is my lunch?     
                    1   The natural world is full of extraordinary  animals, with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle,  or the strange biology of the Emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myth  and misunderstandings, for a very long time.
  And some, have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals, that stand out from the crowd,  The curiosities, I find particularly fascinating.
  The bodies of some animals, stretch and shrink in extraordinary ways.
  Constrictor snakes, can swallow prey, twice their own size.
  While the camel's hump can almost double in weight,  giving it the energy to travel huge distances across deserts.
  What is the secret behind such expandable bodies ?  We've long been fascinated, by the camel's  Places where, during summer,  temperatures can sore, up to 50 degrees Celsius,  while in winter, they can drop, to 30 degrees below freezing.
  With little in the way of food or water, camels can  sometimes go without eating or drinking, for over a week.
  Most other animals, couldn't survive conditions like this.
  How does the camel do it ?  The camel's secret, was thought, to lie in its hump.
  In a healthy camel, it can be big and firm, like this one,  and can weigh as much as 30 kilos, which is the weight of a 10-yo child.
  But if the camel goes without food, and particularly  water, for any length of time, then the hump can get floppy  and even droop over on one side, as that one has done.
  So people used to think, that the camel stored water in its hump.
  In fact, there are two different kinds of camel.
  The one-humped, or Dromedary  and the two-humped, or Bactrian.
  Nearly all camels alive today, are the  domesticated descendants of one or the other.
  The wild Dromedary almost certainly, doesn't exist.
  And only a few Bactrian camels remain,  roaming the deserts of Central Asia.
  A camel is a very tough animal,  but in the wild today,  it's rarer than the Giant Panda.
  It's hard to say, where the idea  of a water-storing hump came from.
  The ancient Romans, were the first to suggest,  that the camel may have a built-in water reservoir.
  And then, later on, people got the idea,  that it had two stomachs.
  One for food, and one for water.
  In the 18th century, an eminent anatomist, John Hunter,  decided to investigate the truth behind these assertions,  and he dissected a camel.
  He found, that the stomach consisted of 3 or 4  compartments, similar to those of a cow or a sheep.
  But inside one of those compartments,  he discovered these pocket-like structures,  which are not found, in any other large mammal.
  Hunter didn't know what the pockets were for,  but others after him, proposed  that they were special, water-storing cells.
  And then, despite any kind of evidence to prove that this was true,  for another 250 years, books on natural history, like this one,  featured illustrations of water-storing cells, in the camel's stomach.
  We now know, that that's not true,  even though, we don't know exactly, what the strange pockets are for.
  But, the camel's hump is certainly not filled with water.
  It's made entirely of fatty tissue.
  It is, in fact, an energy reserve,  for times when food is scarce.
  And it can expand to such a degree,  that it makes up 80 percent of the camel's body-fat.
  This enables a camel to go for two weeks  without feeding, if necessary.
  But there's a twist to the story.
  When fat is broken down in the body, it produces  not just energy, but also water.
  In fact, each gram of fat broken down during  metabolism, produces one gram of water.
  So, could the camel's hump provide it with extra water, after all?  A fatty hump, that contains both food and water  would seem to be just what a desert animal needs.
  But, it's not as simple as that.
  To consume its fat, an animal needs more oxygen,  so, it has to breathe more.
  So, when living on the fat in its hump, the camel actually  looses more water through its airways, then it gains.
  So the camel doesn't have a secret store of water.
  How then, can it survive in a waterless desert?  Camels can go without drinking, for more than a week,  because they have an extraordinary ability,  to retain the body moisture.
  We ourselves, loose over a liter of water a day,  through our moister-laden breath.
  But the camel has nostrils, which he can shut tight.
  And that, not only keeps out the sand,  but retains the breath, within the nose.
  And there, the moisture can be reabsorbed  by the linings of the nostrils.
  Most mammals also loose a lot of water,  when they cool their bodies, by sweating.
  But camels can endure a rise in body temperature,  that would kill most other mammals.
  Without sweating.
  If our temperature goes up, by as little as one degree,  it's a sign of illness.
  While 3 degrees causes vital organ damage, and eventually death.
  The camel can cope with as much as 6 degrees rise, with no ill effect.
  This means, that camels don't have to sweat,  until conditions get very hot, indeed.
  And, if necessary, they tolerate loosing  more of their body water, than other mammals.
  When animals become dehydrated,  their blood becomes thicker, and more difficult to pump through the body.
  If we loose 10 percent of our body water,  we start to go dizzy and blind.
  And at 15 percent, our internal organs start to fail.
  Camels however, can loose a third of their body water, with no ill effect.
  Something that would kill most other animals.
  How do they do it?  Well, some of the answers may lie in the shape of their blood cells.
  These are the red blood cells from a human being,  which are disc-shaped, like that of most mammals.
  These, on the other hand, are from a camel,  and are slimmer and more oval in shape.
  It may be, that the oval, streamlined shape,  makes it easier for the blood to flow,  when the animal is dehydrated.
  Certainly, the camel's blood is less thick and sticky than ours.
  The cells also have particularly strong walls.
  This prevents them from rupturing, when the  animal suddenly drinks large amounts of water.
  And when they do find water,  camels have the ability, to drink it very quickly.
  A single camel, can take the contents  of all these bottles, (that's 100 liters),  in a mere ten minutes.
  For any other animal to do that, it would be extremely dangerous.
  But the camel has the ability,to hold the water in the stomach,  and only release it into the blood stream,  very slowly, in a way that does no damage.
  We now understand, how camels can survive harsh desert conditions.
  And yet, surprisingly, new research suggests,  that they may first have evolved,  to live in the cold Arctic.
  Scientists, have recently discovered  the fossil bones of giant, shaggy camels,  that roamed the forests of the Canadian Arctic,  something of a half million years ago.
  The arctic camel was a third larger, than the modern Bactrian  but otherwise looked very similar.
  And that may be no coincidence.
  The wide, flat feet, that stop the camel  from sinking into desert sand,  could also have helped its ancestors, walk in deep snow.
  And a fatty hump, provided the food reserve  the camel would need, to survive long, cold winters.
  We may never fully understand the mysteries of the camel's hump,  but it evolved first, as a way of keeping warm, or staying cool.
  But we have unraveled many other mysteries,  of the animal's body, that enable it  to endure conditions, that few other  animals would be able to withstand.
  The camel's hump can change dramatically in shape and size.
  And in part two, we meet another creature  that can stretch its body, in a most extraordinary way.
  The camel can go for days, without water.
  Our second curiosity, can fast for months on end,  and then devour prey, many times its own size.
  This is a green Anaconda.
  One of the largest snakes in the world.
  It's about 4 meters long, and weighs 70 kilos.
  And it's only half grown.
  They can grow to a length of 6 meters,  and weigh twice as much as this one.
  But it's their ability to be able to swallow  enormous prey, that's really grabbed our imagination.
  Could one of these really bite a man,  and swallow him whole, and alive?  In the 16th century,  European explorers, venturing into the Amazon jungle,  were fascinated by tales of a huge river monster.
  It was said to devour cattle and deer  and to spit out water, like shot from a canon  knocking animals out of trees.
  These fantastic stories, led people  to go in search of this marvelous beast.
  In 1907, a British explorer, Colonel Percy Fawcett,  claimed to have encountered  an enormous snake, on the Amazon river.
  "A huge head", he said, rose up from the water,  dangerously close to his canoe,  and a colossal anaconda emerged.
  Greatly alarmed, he shot the snake dead.
  He claimed, that when measured,  it proved to be nearly 19 meters, over 60 feet long.
  But Fawcett's account was met with disbelief.
  And he never provided convincing proof, because soon after that,  he vanished into the Brazilian jungle, and was never seen again.
  The creature that Fawcett encountered,  was almost certainly a green anaconda.
  Despite their massive proportions,  these huge snakes are seldom seen,  because they spend most of their time in water,  waiting in ambush for their prey.
  In this murky world, they're certainly well camouflaged,  and so, some people believed, that somewhere  another real monster might still be lurking, unseen.
  In the 1960's a snake was brought to the  Museum of Zoology, at University College London.
  This is it.
  It had lived in London Zoo for some years,  before it died, and it was 5 meters long.
  A lot of work went into preparing the skeleton.
  It had to be carried out,  onto the flat roof of the museum,  and it was finally displayed,  in this rather unusual way.
  Wrapped around the branch of a tree.
  For years the museum displayed it as an anaconda.
  But in 2012, a member of the public saw  an old photo of the snake on the museumâs website  and pointed out, that it looked like  an African rock python, and not an anaconda.
  Itâs unclear, how the mistake came about.
  The markings on the two snakes, are quite different.
  But both are giants.
  And thereâs much controversy,  as to which species, is the largest snake of all.
  Anacondas, pythons and boas, like this one  donât kill with venom.
 Theyâre constrictors.
  They squeeze their prey to death.
  And their coils can exert  a very strong pressure indeed,  as I can feel, with this one on my arm.
  But a big anaconda, can squeeze  with a force of around 4,000 kilos.
  Thatâs like having a bus on your chest.
  And that can certainly crush the spine of a deer, or a capibara.
  And yet, constrictor snakes, donât usually crush their prey.
  In most cases, they simply squeeze it so hard,  that the animal canât breathe.
  Every time itâs prey tries to inhale,  the snakeâs powerful muscles squeeze harder.
  The unfortunate victim then, either dies because  itâs blood can no longer circulate, or suffocates.
  An anaconda, or a python, can kill prey  that is not only twice it's own body size,  but many times bigger than it's head.
  So, how does it manage to swallow itâs victim whole?  Popular folklore has it, that anacondas and pythons,  unhinge, or dislocate their jaws to swallow large prey.
  That is not true.
  They do however, have the ability to open  their mouths wider, than most animals.
  Pythons and anacondas, have this additional bone,  attached to the back of their jaws.
  This provides a double hinge, at the joint,  and allows them, to open their jaws  extremely wide, both downwards and sideways.
  In addition, the two sides of the lower jaw,  are not fused together, but joined by an elastic ligament.
  This gives the jaws a lot of stretch,  and they can even move apart, when the snake  is swallowing a large prey.
  It also allows each side of the jaw,  to move independently of the other.
  When eating a meal, particularly,  one that is much larger than itself,  the snake can alternatively  move it's jaws on either side of it's head,  and walk it's prey into it's mouth,  even while it's victim is still alive.
  As the jaws open wide,  the snake's elastic skin stretches.
  But the mobility of the skull, comes with a price.
  Many of the joints, that in other snakes are solid,  have been replaced by mobile ones.
  So the skull has less crushing power.
  As a consequence, the snake has to use  its entire body, to overpower its prey.
  Getting large prey into the mouth, is one problem.
  But how does a snake push it all the way down  the length of its body, into its stomach?  This is a Burmese python,  and it hasn't fed for a long time.
  So, I'm hoping to give it a little breakfast,  with a dead rat.
  Saliva from the salivary glands in the mouth,  has moistened the prey,  so it's easier to swallow.
  And now, it's moving its jaws,  drawing the rat farther down it's throat  until eventually, the muscles of the flanks take over,  squeezing the prey and pushing against the ribs,  so that, it looks, as though the snake  is as it were, crawling around the rat.
  And that will continue for some time,  as the prey is worked down  into the snake's body,  until eventually, it reaches the stomach,  which is around the middle, here.
  Equally remarkable is, what happens inside the snake.
  After months of fasting, it has to  restart its digestive system quickly.
  Within a day, some of the internal organs double in size.
  The heart expands,  pumping greater volumes of blood around the body.
  And special cells in the lining of the stomach,  produce powerful enzymes,  that break down flesh and bones.
  And when the prey is entirely digested,  the python's organs return to normal again.
  Anacondas and pythons are able to take in  enormous meals, in a single mouthful.
  But how do they then survive fasting for months on end?  Like all cold-blooded animals,  snakes get much of their heat from the sun.
  So they need less food to fuel their bodies,  and most of what they eat,  is converted directly into body mass.
  Snakes continue to grow throughout their lives,  and anacondas get bigger than any other species,  because they live mostly in water.
  Their massive bodies, supported by its buoyancy.
  So, it's certainly possible, that an anaconda  could grow, to an enormous size.
  But how large can a snake really get?  In 2009, further light was shed on this question  with the discovery of the fossils of a super snake.
  It was given the name "Titanoboa"  and it suggests that snakes can get very large, indeed.
  Titanoboa was nearly 13 meters long,  the length of a bus,  and must have weighed over a ton.
  It lived around 60 million years ago,  shortly after the extinction of the dinosaurs.
  We don't know for sure, but it may be, that  the warmer climate of the earth at the time,  allowed cold-blooded snakes, to grow much larger in size.
  What is certain, is that for at least 10 million years,  Titanoboa was the largest predator on the planet.
  Both the camel and the anaconda  can withstand extreme periods of fasting.
  But it's only by looking inside the camel's hump,  and the anaconda's stomach,  that we have discovered the truth  behind their amazing  expandable bodies.
 
                    1   The natural world is full of extraordinary  animals, with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle,  or the strange biology of the Emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myth  and misunderstandings, for a very long time.
  And some, have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals, that stand out from the crowd,  The curiosities, I find particularly fascinating.
  In this program, we meet two animals,  who's extraordinary body shapes are determined by their diet.
  The blue whale grows enormous by  feeding on tiny shrimp-like creatures,  while flamingos spend their lives,  eating with their heads upside down.
  And yet, both ways are curiously similar.
  The blue whale weighs almost 200 tons.
  It's the largest animal on earth,  and it's rarely seen.
  I didn't glimpse one, until I had been  filming animals, for almost 50 years,  and when I did, it was one of the greatest thrills of my life.
  I can see its tail, just under my boat here.
  And it's coming up, coming up !  There!  The blue whale,  is 100 feet long, 30 meters.
  Nothing like that can grow on land,  because no bone is strong enough, to support such bulk.
  Only in the sea, can you get such huge size  as that magnificent creature.
  The blue whale was a mystery to science, for a long time.
  Living out in the deep oceans, people rarely caught sight of  more than the spout of this giant.
  The first published description, comes from a physician,  Robert Sibbald, who found a whale,  stranded off the coast of Scotland, in 1692.
  It was first named after Sibbald,  but later given the scientific name  Balaenoptera musculus.
  The Latin "musculus", means both,  "muscle" and "little mouth".
  An ironic double meaning, for the largest animal on earth.
  When the first blue whale specimens,  were washed up on our shores,  they must have caused quite a stir and excitement.
  Here was a colossal animal, weighing over 150 tonnes.
  Nothing as big, had ever been seen before.
  A giant of this scale, must be a predator  at the top of the food chain.
  But what kind of creature was it?  And what was it feeding on, to make it so big?  The first blue whale specimens,  were found at a time,  when scientists were just starting to classify animals,  not only by their external appearance,  but by their internal structures.
  And few animals proved as problematic as the whales.
  From the outside, they looked and behaved like fish.
  But the internal organs, were like those of a large mammal.
  The bones of the whale's front fins,  are very similar, to those in our own arms.
  The five digits on the hand, are clearly visible.
  But they've been modified into paddles, for swimming.
  What kind of creatures were these, truly extraordinary animals?  The controversy, as to whether whales were fish or mammals,  came to a head, in a New York courtroom in 1818.
  A jury was asked, to pass judgment on the question,  for the purpose of the New York State law.
  The issue had come up, because a shrewd merchant,  who owned three barrels of whale oil,  had refused to pay tax, levied on fish oil.
  He pointed out, that according to the latest  scientific opinion, whales weren't in fact fish.
  The inspector, collecting the tax, had scorned the idea.
  "What, whale is not fish?" he said,  and slapped handcuffs on the merchant.
  The lead witness, was a respected scientist,  called Samuel Mitchell.
  Mitchell entered the courtroom, expecting to explain to everybody,  why whales were mammals, not fish.
  But instead, found himself being attacked  by the most gifted lawyer in the country,  William Sampson  Sampson argued, that scientists didn't have the right,  to rename God's creatures and force them into absurd groupings.
  The idea, that humans and whales, should be in  the same category, seemed to him grotesque.
  Mitchell and science, never stood a chance.
  After deliberating for 15 minutes,  the jury announced the verdict, in favor  of Sampson and the fish-oil inspector.
  According to New York State law,  whales were deemed to be fish, not mammals.
  Although the general public still considered whales, to be fish,  scientists were by now, largely agreed, that they were indeed mammals,  that had taken to living in the sea.
  But what was the blue whale feeding on,  to allow it, to grow to such an extraordinary size?  The answer could be found, by looking inside the mouth,  which contains some very bizarre looking structures.
  This is the skeleton of a right whale  and its mouth parts are very similar, to those of a blue whale.
  Instead of teeth it has these strange,  plate-like structures, hanging from the upper jaw.
  The plates are aligned alongside each other  and the inner edges fray, because the large tongue  continually rubs up against them.
  And then, the frayed edges entangle,  to form a thick mat, that acts like a gigantic sieve.
  And when early naturalists, opened up the gigantic gut of these whales,  they found not fish, or other large prey,  but tiny, shrimp-like creatures, called krill.
  To everyone's astonishment, it turned out,  that these whales feed, on some of the smallest prey in the sea.
  And these strange plates, serve to filter the krill, out of the water.
  The rows of plates are called baleen.
  And we now know, that they form  a highly specialized filter feeding system.
  The giant animal dives deep, beneath the surface,  in search of swarms of krill.
  The pleated skin, on the throat and belly expand,  and the mouth balloons outward, to four times the size,  taking in an enormous mouthful of water.
  The tongue, then forces the water out  through the baleen, and thousands of tiny krill are left behind.
  Today, we know a lot more about this unusual feeding structure.
  This is baleen.
  It's often referred to as "whale bone",  but it's not bone at all, it's keratin.
  The same substance, as our hair and finger nails.
  And it's both strong, and slightly elastic.
  The plates emerge from the whale's jaws, instead of teeth,  and continue to grow throughout the whale's life time.
  These bands in it, are much like the rings of a tree.
  Several may be laid down, in the course of a year,  so the baleen can give us an indication, of the age of a whale.
  We also know from other evidence, that  blue whales can live, to be over 100 years old.
  Recently discovered fossil whales,  had both teeth, and simple filters.
  Which suggests, that early filter feeding whales  may have sucked small animals from the seafloor.
  There is a whale alive today, that feeds in just that way.
  The Grey whale.
  It stirs up the sediment, and scoops it into its mouth,  and then filters out, small food particles, with its baleen.
  Krill is abundant in the oceans.
  And blue whales, can eat enormous  quantities of it, with each mouthful.
  Soon swallowing 90 times more,  than they immediately need.
  The surplus is then stored, in the form of blubber.
  And this helps them cope with periods, when food is scarce.
  The blue whale was a mystery to us, for a long time.
  But we now know, that its enormous body is fueled  with vast quantities, of the tiniest of prey.
  Over the course of its lifetime, a blue whale will consume  around 50 thousand tonnes of krill.
  And, unlike teeth, which fall out with old age,  the baleen never stops growing,  and is constantly replaced.
  Maybe, this unusual body design,  not only helps the blue whale grow to this enormous size,  but also to such a formidable old age.
  In part two, we meet another filter feeder,  and discover how its unique diet,  has affected both its body design, and lifestyle.
  The blue whale, has become a giant  by filtering tiny creatures out of the ocean.
  Our second curiosity, the flamingo, also has  an unusual body, that has been shaped, by its diet.
  For a long time, the flamingos  were birds of myth and mystery.
  Travelers in Africa, saw them, shrouded by the hazy mists,  rising from volcanic soda lakes,  and believed that they were fire birds.
  In Egyptian mythology, the fire bird or Phoenix,  was a sacred creature, with beautiful red plumage,  which was consumed by magical fire,  and then rose again, from its own ashes.
  The flamingo's scientific name Phoenicopterus,  reflects some of its legendary past.
  It means "Phoenix wing".
  These beautiful and elegant creatures  are some of the most curious looking of birds.
  No other bird, has a beak shaped quite like this.
  Or indeed, such glorious pink colours.
  And yet, we're so familiar with them,  that we rarely think about their strange appearance.
  Why is it, that the flamingo is so different, from all other birds?  In that classic children's book, Alice in Wonderland,  Lewis Carroll has fun, with the flamingo's oddity.
  Alice plays croquet, with the Red Queen, using them as mallets,  holding their heads and necks upside down,  in much the same posture, as the birds take, when feeding.
  When you look at the skeleton of a flamingo,  the thing that strikes you most, is the  extraordinary length of the legs and the neck.
  The neck has 17 bones in it.
  Which is no more than in other birds,  but each is greatly elongated,  giving the flamingo its extra long neck, and flexibility.
  But the flamingo's most curious feature, is surely, its beak.
  And the reason, it looks so strange,  is, that it is the only beak, adapted for use upside down.
  In most birds, the upper part of the bill  is larger than the lower one.
  But in flamingos, it's the other way around.
  The lower bill is much bigger and has a deep, central  groove in it, that holds the flamingo's tongue.
  The upper jaw is thin, and movable.
  So, when the bird's head is upside down,  the flamingo's jaws work as it were, normally.
  When feeding, the flamingo gently sweeps its bill back and forth,  sucking water in at the front, and squirting it out from the sides.
  The water that goes in, is murky,  while that, which flows out, is clear.
  And that gives us a clue, to what it's feeding on.
  The beak has tiny bristles, all along its edges,  much like the whale's baleen.
  And the tongue, has two rows of horny spikes, along its length.
  When feeding, the bristles and spikes, form a sieve,  trapping any particles inside.
  And the large tongue, acts as a pump, pushing water in and out.
  It's a unique design for a beak.
  No other bird has one like it.
  Although, at first sight, they may look the same,  flamingo beaks, in fact, come in two different shapes.
  And this is, because they eat slightly different food.
  This is the beak of a Greater flamingo.
  which feeds on crustaceans,  which are usually found near the bottom of a lake.
  It's long and shallow, so the birds  can feed in water, only a few millimeters deep.
  This beak, on the other hand, is from a Lesser flamingo.
  It's bill is shorter, but more bulbous and deep-keeled.
  The Lesser flamingo, feeds on microscopic algae,  which usually float, just below the surface of the water.
  And the deep keel, acts as a buoy,  bobbing along, just at the right depth,  as the bird moves through the water.
  These different bills, allow two species of flamingo,  to live side by side.
  In Africa's Rift valley, Greater and Lesser flamingos  are found on the soda lakes,  having specialized on food, that others can't reach.
  The waters are so hot and toxic,  that they would strip the flesh off any other animal.
  But flamingos thrive here.
  Their long, spindly legs, have tough scales  and their webbed feet, prevent them from sinking into the soft mud.
  The birds can even drink the water,  which is 2 or 3 times saltier than the ocean.
  But it's not just the mud and water, which are poisonous.
  The blue-green algae, which many of them feed on,  actually contain nasty, toxic chemicals.
  If that were to accumulate, in the internal  organs of the bird, they could be lethal.
  But the flamingo deals with that, by directing these chemicals  into the feathers and the skin, where they do no damage.
  The feathers of the flamingo, contain very high concentrations of toxins,  but they also contain another chemical.
  Carotene.
  Carotene is the reddish pigment, that gives flamingos their distinctive pink color.
  And it also comes from their diet.
  But carotene is not harmful.
 On the contrary.
  It's a source of vitamin A, and boosts the  immune system, protecting against illness.
  So, a pink bird is also a healthy bird.
  This glorious pink color, was probably  an incidental bi-product to their diet.
  Nonetheless, over time, it has evolved to play  an important role in the flamingoâs social life.
  The flashes of colour, are an integral part of their courtship display.
  And recent research has shown, that the pinkest flamingos,  are the most popular, when it comes to finding a mate.
  When flamingos breed, much of the carotene in their diet  gets channeled into the developing young.
  Even the eggs receive pigments.
  So much in fact, that the yoke can be virtually blood-red in colour.
  These eggs are from captive flamingos, and are infertile.
  Let's have a look.
  There.
  Well, it's nothing like the colour of any  other bird yoke, that I've ever seen.
  Flamingos are so efficient at collecting their specialized food,  that the yoke is actually packed full of protein and fat.
  And this allows the chick to grow particularly quickly  and gives it a good start in life.
  Despite the colour of the yoke,  the chicks hatch with fluffy Grey feathers.
  They're fed on special milk, from their parent's crop.
  This is not regurgitated food, but a secretion,  produced by the lining of the digestive tract.
  And it's deep red in colour.
  The flamingo chick relies on this,  for the first few weeks of its life.
  And it will eventually enable it,  to grow its glorious pink plumes.
  We now know, that much of the flamingo's  bizarre appearance, has been shaped by its diet.
  The one question, that continues to baffle scientists,  to which group of birds, do the flamingos actually belong?  Some thought, that they must be related to ducks and geese.
  Because of their webbed feet, and short, duck-like beaks.
  But others were convinced, that with their long legs,  they're more like waders, such as storks.
  Recent DNA studies, contradict both these suggestions.
  They reveal, that the flamingo's closest relative  may in fact be a small diving bird, that looks nothing like a flamingo.
  The Grebe.
  Further studies found other similarities in the structure of the eye,  and the number of feathers on the wing.
  So it seems, that flamingos and grebes are  indeed each other's closest relatives.
  But over time, diet and lifestyle,  have shaped the flamingo into a very different looking bird.
  Far removed, from its grebe-like ancestor.
  It's fair to say, there's nothing else quite like a flamingo.
  The flamingo and the blue whale, are two very different creatures.
  One living on land, and one in the deep oceans.
  And yet, their bodies have been shaped in a similar way, by their diet.
  Making each of them a curiosity, within its own group.
 
                    1   The natural world is full of extraordinary  animals, with amazing life histories.
  Yet, certain stories are more intriguing than most.
  The mysteries of a butterfly's life cycle,  or the strange biology of the Emperor penguin.
  Some of these creatures were surrounded by myth  and misunderstandings, for a very long time.
  And some, have only recently revealed their secrets.
  These are the animals, that stand out from the crowd,  The curiosities, I find particularly fascinating.
  Some animals have intriguing ways, of protecting their skin.
  The hippopotamus lives in Africa under the hot  tropical sun, yet doesn't get sunburned.
  And Capuchin monkeys live in insect infested jungles,  but hardly ever get bitten.
  How do these animals beat the elements, and protect themselves  from sun, parasites and disease?  Hippos are large land mammals, that can weigh up to 3 tonnes.
  And they need to keep their huge bodies cool, and protected from the sun.
  To avoid the heat, they spend much of the day swimming,  as they are doing now, in the waters behind me.
  But when they're on land,strangely,  they don't appear to get sunburned.
  The secret of their sun tolerance, lies within their skin.
  It can sometimes appear shiny and greasy.
  It has unique properties, that shocked the early explorers,  and now excites modern scientists.
  Hippos live in Africa, south of the Sahara,  where temperatures can reach 40 degrees centigrade  But they spend much of the day, submerged in rivers, lakes and swamps,  and so avoid the worst of the sun's rays.
  They possess formidable teeth, but they are in fact herbivores,  and eat mostly grass, great quantities of it.
  And they graze mostly at night.
  Even so, continually moving in and out of water,  together with being roasted, by the rays of the sun,  could be very damaging to their skin.
  But curiously, hippos remain healthy.
  Throughout history, the hippopotamus has  been the subject of many strange tales.
  The Greeks claimed, they sweated blood.
  And the Romans said, they deliberately pierced  their skin on sharp rushes, to release blood.
  It seems bizarre, that an animal would make itself bleed on purpose.
  In the 19th century, one special hippopotamus  allowed people to get a closer look  at these strange skin secretions.
  In 1849, the British Consul for Egypt,  Charles Augustus Murray, formally requested  that the Pasha of Egypt, helped capture a hippo,  for the Zoological Society of London.
  Hunters searched the reeds, on a remote island called Obaysch,  2,000 km up the Nile, from Cairo.
  They discovered a male hippo, that was only a few days old.
  When they tried to grab it, a strange thing happened.
  Murray describes how a slimy exudation,  lavishly poured forth, from the  innumerable pores in the skin,  rendering it so slippery,  that the animal was impossible to hold.
  The hunters dropped the baby hippo  back into the waters of the Nile,  but they managed to retrieve it again,  using the hook of a spear.
  The prize hippo was named Obaysch,  after the island of its capture.
  And here he is.
  Before his capture, young Obaysch lived with his mother.
  She had moved away from the herd, to give birth alone,  and she protected him, from lions and crocodiles.
  Whether Obaysch became accidentally separated  from his mother, we'll never know.
  But we do know, that secretions from his skin  made him so slippery,  that he very nearly escaped capture.
  At this time, very little was known about hippos,  and many people believed, that they were some kind of horse,  that had taken, to living in rivers.
  In the early 20th century, naturalists decided,  that they were closely related to pigs.
  DNA evidence however, now shows,  that in fact their ancestors were cetaceans,  the group that contains whales and dolphins.
  So, hippos still retain many adaptations, for a life in water.
  Hippos are very heavy animals, but for most of their time,  their bodies are supported by water.
  They're not really very good swimmers.
  In the water, they move by bounding across the bottom.
  They're well adapted to a semi-aquatic life,  because their ears, their eyes and their  nostrils are all towards the top of the head,  which enables them to lie almost totally submerged,  and yet still keep notice, of what's going on, on land.
  But their skin, is almost entirely hairless.
  So, on land it has to be kept moist.
  In order to prevent young Obaysch, from sunburn and drying out,  the Egyptian Pasha had a boat built, with a bathing pool,  to transport Obaysch in comfort,  all the way down the river Nile.
  Accompanied by several cows, to supply him with milk,  he arrived safely in Cairo, 4 months later  On receiving Obaysch, the British consul wrote excitedly  to the Zoological Society of London,  confirming that the hippo was alive,  and as tame and playful as a puppy.
  But his travels were not yet over.
  In the spring of 1850, Obaysch was taken to Alexandria,  to board a P&O steamship, called the Ripon.
  A special hippo house with a water tank, was built on the deck,  and in May, Obaysch arrived safely in Southampton.
  With the help of block and tackle, he was  loaded onto a train, bound for London.
  And at 10 o'clock at night, the tired hippo  and his keeper, reached London Zoo.
  His home was a newly constructed enclosure,  complete with a heated swimming pool.
  After many hours of traveling,  the hippo gratefully plunged into the water.
  Obaysch, the hippo sensation, had arrived.
  A journey of over 5,000 miles, by sailboat,  steamboat, and a train brought a hippo to England.
  The first one, since Roman times.
  Now Europeans had a chance to get  close to this unusual creature,  and perhaps learn more, about  it's strange skin secretions.
  Later, more hippos arrived at other zoos,  and the blood-red sweat was seen again.
  In the cooler climate of Europe,  hippos don't sweat very much.
  But zoo-keepers have reported,  that sometimes in the morning,  they see red trickles forming  on the flanks or these animals.
  It comes from particularly large pores,  which form streaks on the animal's side,  which does look, a little like blood.
  We know for some time, that this is a moisturizer.
  But why it's red, has only just been discovered.
  A little more.
  Come on.
  There we go.
  Recently, Japanese scientists were intrigued  to see photos of a wild baby hippo,  with light-pink skin, that still didn't burn  under the harsh African sun.
  They wondered, if the red secretion  played a role, in protecting its pale skin.
  So they collected hippo secretion,  from captive hippos, to look at its composition.
  They discovered two pigments.
  A red one, that they named Hipposudoric Acid,  and an orange one, that they called Norhipposudoric Acid.
  The red pigment was found to absorb  harmful wavelengths of light,  and both pigments were anti-bacterial.
  Here was the answer, to why hippos never got sunburned.
  And why the wounds of battling males,  rarely became infected.
  The mysterious slime, is neither blood, nor sweat,  but a specialized secretion, that turns red in sunlight,  and protects the hippo's skin.
  So, what became of Obaysch,  the first ever hippo in captivity,  that gave us a close-up view, of these curious creatures?  For several years, he was the sensation of London Zoo.
  He even inspired the Hippo Polka, a popular dance at its time.
  But visitors grew weary of him.
  Some were disappointed, not to see a giant river horse.
  And others expected a ferocious beast, not a gentle giant.
  Obaysch died in 1878, at the age of 28.
  And he and others that followed,  taught us some intriguing things about hippos,  including the reason for the blood-red droplets,  found on their skin.
  So, hippos can produce their very own  natural suncream, which is waterproof,  moisturizing, and anti-bacterial.
  Next, meet another animal, that also has its own curious cure.
  The Capuchin monkey, that deals with biting insects  in a particularly intriguing way.
  The hippo produces a natural suncream,  to prevent its skin from getting burned.
  Capuchin monkeys also need to protect their skin,  and do so, in a very surprising way.
  When early explorers reached the Americas in the 15th century,  they encountered small monkeys, with patches of  dark-brown fur on their heads, that resembled hoods.
  So they named them after a group of Franciscan friars,  called Capuchin monks.
  Capuchin monkeys, quickly charmed their way into our hearts.
  With dextrous hands, and inquisitive personalities,  they seemed very human-like.
  They were also adept, at learning tricks.
  And soon became popular performers, on our streets.
  In the past, we used to teach monkeys,  how to do things, how to perform tricks.
  But things are different today.
  Today, monkeys are teaching us things.
  Watch what happens, when I give them  a few spring onions,  and some chili peppers.
  They're clearly not eating, what I offered them.
  They're rubbing themselves, with the peppers and the onions.
  You might think they're nuts, because they're captive monkeys,  and they are just doing that, to entertain themselves.
  But not so.
  I've seen capuchins do just that, in the wild.
  These white-faced capuchins in Costa Rica,  reacted in much the same way, when they  came across a particular rainforest plant,  the Piper plant.
  These leaves have a distinctive liquorice scent,  and they're hard to come by.
  So, when they do find them, the monkeys  pass the leaves among the troupe,  so that everyone could have a share.
  Both in the wild, and in captivity  Capuchin monkeys become similarly excited,  at the sight of lemons or limes.
  And again, the same frenzied activity,  and fur rubbing follows.
  What is it about these plants,  that gets the monkeys so excited?  We know, they all give off a pungent smell,  so could this be, what the capuchins are after?  Smell plays an important part  in the lives of many primates,  but none more so, than in the lives  of these lovely ring-tailed lemurs.
  They use it,  both, to establish their position within the troupe,  and also the boundaries, the frontiers of their territory.
  If you look at the inside of their forearms,  there's a black patch, without fur.
  And there, the skin is loaded with glands, that produce  a very strong smell.
  And when these boys go into battle.
.
 oops!  When they go into battle,  they draw their furry tail to their forearms,  loading it, with scent from those glands,  and then, they wave it over their backs,  in the direction of their enemies.
  In a kind of stink fight.
  You understand that, donât you?  Oh!  The pungent scent is also used  by males, during the mating season.
  This male, has rubbed his own distinctive smell onto his tail,  and he now wafts it towards a female,  to signal his intentions.
  But she is not entirely convinced.
  Unlike lemurs, capuchins don't have scent glands.
  So, some thought, that they could be using  the smell of certain plants, for communication.
  But it turns out, that they have  a different perfume for that job.
  Urine.
  Which they apply lavishly to their fur.
  So why then, do they also anoint  themselves with other smells?  The answer may be found, in our own history.
  The early Romans, noticed some 2,000 years ago,  that the fruits and leaves of the lemon plant,  have an exceptionally strong scent,  that can be used to ward off insects.
  A further clue, as to why capuchins might  cover themselves, in such pungent smells,  comes from this plant.
 The piper plant.
  Throughout the Amazon, Indian tribes apply it  as an antiseptic on wounds.
  And in Costa Rica, it's used as an insect repellent.
  Could it be, that Capuchin monkeys protect themselves,  against the onslaught of mosquitoes  in much the same way as humans do,  by rubbing themselves, with mosquito repellent?  In 1993, scientists at Oxford University,  decided to put the question to the test.
  They collected some feather lice,  and put them into Petri dishes overnight.
  Into one dish, they also placed a slice of lime.
  The next day, the lice, without the lime, were mostly alive.
  Whilst in the other dish, two thirds had died,  and the remainder were paralyzed.
  Clearly, the lime contains a lethal insecticide.
  Today, we know, that citrus fruit peel  does indeed contain insecticides,  which disrupts the nervous system of many small insects,  causing them to become uncoordinated and paralyzed.
  The leaves of the piper plant, are antiseptic,  and contain substances, to protect against  fungal and bacterial infection.
  And chili pepper extract, is commonly used in households and gardens,  to deter small mammals and insect pests.
  So it seems, that the clever monkeys know exactly,  how to make the best use of nature's remedies.
  Recent researchers also revealed, that capuchins  anoint themselves far more during the wet season,  When mosquitoes are more abundant,  and the risk of infection is higher.
  Troupes use different plants, possibly, simply  because they have to use, what's locally available.
  But there's one substance with insect repellent qualities,  that appeals to primates, including capuchins,  that comes, not from a plant, but from an animal.
  An animal  .
.
like this.
  A giant millipede.
  When attacked, or in danger, tropical millipedes  often produce a powerful, defensive secretion.
  And black lemurs have worked out,  how to use this to their advantage.
  When they find a millipede, they give it a gentle bite to the head,  to make it release its secretion, and then rub this through their fur.
  The toxic fluid has a strong smell, and is highly irritating.
  But it protects the lemurs against mosquitoes.
  This pungent secretion, has apparently another strange effect.
  It seems to act as a narcotic, sending the lemur into a kind of trance.
  Like other drugs, it has powerful side effects.
  We still don't understand how capuchins and lemurs  select the plants, that they use for medicinal purposes.
  These capuchins behind me, were born and raised in captivity,  so they never encountered the plants,  that their parents and ancestors would have used.
  So, how do the monkeys know, which plants to choose?  Can they detect particular substances in them?  Or is it something, they learn from others?  We don't yet know the answers, but it could be that  babies learn by watching the adults,  and that it's passed down the family line.
  It's clearly a great, social event with everyone joining in.
  And afterwards, the entire group appears to be more tightly bonded.
  When Europeans first saw monkeys in the wild,  they thought, that they were imitating, what  people did, in some of their behaviours.
  But quite the reverse.
  It now turns out, that many of the local people  did things that the monkeys had taught them.
  Using plants as medicines.
  So it seems, clever monkeys have taught us a trick or two.
  So it's clear, that we are not alone in using  medicines against injuries and infections.
  Both Capuchin monkeys and hippos, discovered  some medical remedies long before we did.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The natural world is full  of extraordinarily shaped creatures,  but how have the stretched bodies of some given them an edge?  I have had the fortune to meet  some of the planet's most enchanting creatures, but some  stand out more than others, because of their intriguing biology.
  Our knowledge of some of these creatures extends back centuries.
  Others we have discovered more recently.
  In this series, I share their stories  and reveal why they are considered natural curiosities.
  In this programme, I investigate two creatures  that have taken the ordinary and made it extraordinary,  the chameleon that has an extra-long tongue to catch prey   and the giraffe with a neck so long it can reach the top of trees.
  How and why have these animals stretched nature to the limit?   The chameleon is a truly bizarre creature,  both in its behaviour and its appearance unlike anything else on earth.
  So, not surprisingly, it's given rise to all kinds of legends and myths.
  This is The History Of The Four-Footed Beasts by Edward Topsell,  written in the 17th century,  and he calls the chameleon "a fraudulent, ravening and gluttonous beast,  "impure and unclean by the law of God.
"  Some believed it was constructed by the devil from parts of other animals,  the tail of a monkey, the skin of a crocodile,  the tongue of a toad, the horns of a rhinoceros,  and the eyes of who knows what.
  It was a creature sent to the world to spy for a demon master.
  When I first came face to face with a chameleon, more than 50 years ago,  I was struck not only by its beauty  but intrigued by its strange body, particularly by its tongue.
  The outlandish appearance of the chameleon  made it much sought after by curiosity hunters.
  But scientists and naturalists, too,  were greatly puzzled by its extraordinary behaviour and anatomy.
  It looked and behaved like no other reptile.
  Even today, we are still discovering new things  about its unique eyes, its astonishing tongue  and its ability to change its appearance.
  Chameleons are notoriously hard to find, partly because they move so slowly,  but also because they match their surroundings  in terms of colour so very well.
  This one in front of me is a dwarf chameleon from Natal in South Africa.
  If that's threatened by a snake,  it doesn't bother to change its colour very much,  because a snake's colour vision is not very good,  but if it's threatened by a bird, it does camouflage itself very well indeed.
  Some species of chameleon, and there are 85 different species in the family,  can even fine-tune their camouflage.
  If they detect a snake approaching from below,  they become lighter in colour and so less noticeable against the sky.
  On the other hand, if the threat comes from a bird,  they become darker to match the background beneath them.
  A chameleon's colour is affected not only by its surroundings,  but by the temperature and the light and its emotional state.
  Behind this screen, there's a rival male.
  Let's see what happens if I remove the screen and let them see one another.
  This highly coloured male is dominant,  and he immediately adds bright, aggressive colours to his display.
  The other male remains dark  and too frightened to change colour and fight back.
  It's clear who is the boss.
  Chameleons are emotional creatures.
  Darker colouration signals anger.
  This female, on the right, is not in the mood to accept the approaches  of this brightly coloured and hopeful male.
  Exactly how chameleons achieved such dramatic colour changes  greatly puzzled early naturalists.
  An Englishman named Barrow, who travelled in Africa in the 19th century,  thought the change in colour was caused by something to do with air.
  He wrote, "Previous to the chameleon assuming a change in colour,  "it makes a long inspiration,  "the body swelling out to twice its usual size,  "and as this inflation subsides, the change of colour gradually takes place.
"  Well, that's an accurate observation of what happens  when a chameleon gets angry, and then its anger subsides,  but actually the change of colour has nothing to do with air.
  A French biologist, Milne-Edwards, soon after that got it about right.
  He wrote, "There exist two layers of membranous pigment  "placed one above the other  "but disposed in such a way to appear simultaneously under the cuticle  "and sometimes in such a manner that one may hide the other,"  which is indeed so.
  Today we know that the chameleon's skin  has three layers of expandable pigmented cells called chromatophores.
  They contain red, yellow, blue and white pigments  with a deeper layer of darker melanin which controls the reflection of light.
  The chameleons use colour change not only to camouflage themselves,  but also to communicate with one another.
  Anyone who looks closely at a chameleon is bound to be fascinated by its eyes.
  They protrude on either side of its head as though they were mounted on turrets,  and, in fact, their eyelids are fused together,  except for one tiny spot right in the middle.
  But the most extraordinary thing about them is that they move independently.
  So, that means the chameleon, at one and the same time,  can be viewing above it and below it.
  So, any insect that lands nearby is going to be spotted almost immediately.
  It seems that its brain receives separate messages from each eye  and views them and receives them, alternately, very fast,  but independent to one another.
  They are not integrated.
  But the advantage of that  is that it does give this all-round, three-dimensional view,  which is unrivalled.
  This extraordinary vision is an essential element  in the way that the chameleon uses its most astonishing feature,  its hugely elongated tongue.
  How this tongue worked, and its construction,  greatly intrigued early naturalists, and understandably.
  This remarkable preserved specimen  shows us in detail the impressive elongated tongue of a chameleon.
  The physical structure of the chameleon's tongue was easy enough to explain,  although it proved to be a somewhat complicated organ,  a hollow tube with a tapered, cartilaginous rod at its base.
  The pad at the end was thought to be rough and sticky,  so that it could snag its prey.
  But the mystery of how a contraption like this  could be lengthened and projected out of the mouth  took a little longer to fully explain.
  Perhaps the way a frigate bird inflates the balloon under its beak,  or how a calling frog blows up its throat sac  could give clues.
  Both do it with air.
  Or maybe the tentacles that carry a snail's eyes.
  It projects them by using its blood as a hydraulic fluid.
  But none of them fitted the bill.
  It's a much more complex process.
  The tongue is a muscular tube that, when relaxed, sits on a rod of cartilage.
  When the chameleon is ready to strike,  muscles at the back of the tongue push it into launch position.
  When the prey is lined up and the distance calculated,  super-fast muscles contract and propel the tongue forward at lightning speed.
  As the tongue shoots off the end of the cartilage,  an extra wave of energy drives it forward to its target.
  Then, like a stretched elastic band,  its elasticity pulls it back into the chameleon's mouth.
  Recently, high-speed images revealed a new detail.
  The tip of the tongue, once thought to be sticky,  is covered in microscopic protrusions that generate suction and secures its prey.
  Chameleons really are the most extraordinary creatures  and they hold surprises for us even today.
  Only this year, a scientist working in Madagascar  discovered a tiny little chameleon, only 29mm long.
  It's the smallest known vertebrate in the world.
  It's astounding to realise that all the organs of a vertebrate's body  could be fitted into such a tiny little creature,  including that extraordinary tongue.
  Next is the story of another amazing elongated structure,  not a tongue but a neck.
  The giraffe is an animal that can't fail to impress.
  Up to 6m, or 19 feet, in height, it's hugely imposing,  intriguing in appearance and mysterious in its biology.
  Our attraction to this unusual creature goes back centuries,  and one feature, in particular, has piqued our curiosity,  its elongated neck.
  Such a structure seemed an impossibility of nature,  but now we better understand the complex biology behind the giraffe's bizarre body.
  Our growing knowledge of this creature  can be traced back to three very special giraffes  and the story of a royal fascination for the exotic.
  In the 19th century, a giraffe named Zarafa, Arabic for "Charming One",  made a big impact on Europe, socially and scientifically.
  She was one of three captured in 1826 at the order of the Viceroy of Egypt,  who wanted to use them as gifts to curry favour with France, Austria and England.
  Zarafa, the strongest of the three, was given to the French,  seen here in a painting by Jacques Raymond Brascassat.
  She travelled from Egypt to Marseille by ship.
  On reaching France, her keepers felt it was too risky to continue by boat  so the decision was made to walk Zarafa from Marseille in the south  all the way to Paris, an overland journey of more than 550 miles.
  To some, this looked like a journey doomed to failure,  but careful planning and the unique biology of the giraffe were in its favour.
  Very wisely, a forward-thinking and eminent French scientist  called Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire  was put in charge of the giraffe.
  But there was something very significant about Zarafa  that would be key to the success of her long journey.
  It was her age.
  She was a youngster, just eight months old.
  Baby giraffes are very robust  and can stand up and run within an hour of being born.
  They have particularly long legs in relation to their bodies,  only half a metre shorter than those of an adult.
  Such long legs help them keep up with their mothers,  so young Zarafa was well equipped for walking.
  Crucial, too, was the fuel for Zarafa's journey.
  Young giraffe suckle for up to a year, and Zarafa was bottle-fed.
  Throughout the journey she drank up to 25 litres of milk a day,  supplied by three milking cows.
  She marched on at a steady pace with her trusty entourage.
  After nearly 200 miles, Zarafa reached Lyon  and Saint-Hilaire broke the walk.
  He hoped to put Zarafa onto a boat to go downriver for the rest of the journey.
  As they waited, 30,000 people flocked to see Zarafa.
  To the public, she was a strange and exotic creature,  and they were intrigued why such a long neck should exist  and curious about how an animal could support its weight.
  In those early days, giraffe were seen as freaks,  strange, horned camels,  whose humps had been flattened by the stretching of their necks.
  But this was exactly what attracted Saint-Hilaire to Zarafa.
  He was fascinated by genetic exaggerations and how they came to be.
  Clearly, the giraffe's long neck enables them to feed  on leaves beyond the reach of other browsers.
  But how could they physically hold up such a long neck, vertically?  Ha-ha!  Studies of giraffe anatomy have revealed just how the neck is supported.
  A long, thick ligament, like a cable, runs the whole length of the neck.
  This counterbalances the weight of the head and the neck,  and in its relaxed position it's tight.
  So, keeping the neck straight and the head up involves very little muscular effort.
  Bending the neck to reach down is more difficult,  because the tough ligament has to be stretched.
  But was the ability to feed from tall trees  the only reason for having a long neck?  As the habits of the giraffe in the wild became better known,  people discovered that rival males fought one another by jousting with their necks.
  Was that the reason that they had developed long necks?  But then someone pointed out that the females had long necks too,  so that suggestion was discarded.
  In truth, there isn't a neat single answer,  but access to high food, better vigilance and temperature regulation  may all have shaped the giraffe's long neck.
  As she walked on, Zarafa continued to attract inquisitive onlookers.
  Few had set eyes on such a creature.
  She appeared a natural impossibility.
  How could a giraffe pump the blood up such a long neck to its brain?  And why didn't the blood rush back down into its feet?  The giraffe's neck may be very tall,  but, in fact, it contains exactly the same number of bones as our own,  that is to say, seven,  but its blood pressure is twice as high as ours.
  In fact, it's higher than any other known animal.
  The pump that produces this pressure, the heart,  surprisingly, is not particularly big,  but it is hugely powerful.
  This is the left ventricle that has been cut through  and you can see how thick the muscle is, getting on for about 8cm.
  This great pump produces blood, squirts it up the artery to the head,  and then, when it comes down through the jugular vein,  there are pocket-shaped valves  which prevent the blood from flowing backwards into the head  if the animal lowers its head in order to have a drink.
  Giraffes find it very awkward to drink from the ground  and, in fact, they rarely do so.
  They get most of their water from leaves and shoots.
  The only way to get their mouths down to the water is to splay their forelegs,  or bend them at the wrist joint.
  The giraffe, in fact, has a relatively short neck, compared to its legs.
  Antelope and zebra can reach down to the ground without bending their legs.
  Only the giraffe and its rain forest relative, the okapi,  have necks that are so short, relative to their legs,  that they must splay or bend them.
  So, perhaps the most remarkable feature of the giraffe is the length of its legs.
  They certainly were key to Zarafa's success.
  At Lyon, there was a plan to rest her legs from walking  and to finish the journey to Paris by boat.
  But all didn't go according to plan.
  The boat didn't appear in Lyon so she walked on and finally got to Paris.
  It took her a total of 41 days to complete the journey of 550 miles to Paris.
  Saint-Hilaire, her trusty companion, was exhausted, but the giraffe was very fit.
  He wrote, "She gained weight and much more strength from the exercise.
  "Her muscles were more defined,  "her coat smoother and glossier upon her arrival than they were in Marseille.
"  Zarafa was presented to King Charles X  and temporarily installed in a greenhouse  in the grounds of the Jardin des Plantes.
  She was a true animal ambassador  and 60,000 people saw her in the first three weeks in Paris.
  In the early 19th century, giraffes were a novelty  and their biology and lives in the wild were still a mystery.
  Zarafa's success was due to a unique interplay  of the giraffe's unusual characteristics and good timing.
  Her youth, long legs and a diet with milk powered her journey right across France.
  A body that was first considered bizarre was revealed to be perfectly evolved.
  Our story began with three giraffe that were given to Europe.
  Zarafa was the most robust of them and she lived a further 18 years.
  The Austrian one lasted just a year,  and the one sent to King George IV of England died after two.
  Saint-Hilaire learnt much from Zarafa  and he became a key figure in the blossoming zoological research in France.
  The giraffe brought to England triggered a surge of interest in animal research  that shifted the centre of zoological gravity from France to England.
  So, we can thank Zarafa for her early role in unravelling the biological mysteries  of the giraffe's extraordinary body and stretched neck.
  Creatures like the outlandish giraffe and chameleon  continue to reveal their biological secrets.
  They really are true natural curiosities.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The island of Komodo in Indonesia,  remote and barren.
  Few people live here.
  It's ruled by a giant reptile.
  It looks like a survivor from the age of the dinosaurs.
  The Komodo dragon.
  Nine feet long.
 A top predator.
  Only one thing can challenge a dragon's dominance.
  Another dragon.
  In the breeding season, males are drawn into savage conflict.
  Huge claws and 60 serrated teeth can inflict terrible damage.
  The Komodo dragon is the only reptile that still rules the land  as dinosaurs once did.
  It can dominate here because it has no competition.
  But for the rest of the world's reptiles and amphibians,  survival is a much tougher struggle.
  Like the dragon, reptiles and amphibians seem primitive,  better suited to an earlier age.
  Yet they have a surprising repertoire of extraordinary strategies.
  And they still thrive in many parts of the planet.
  This is the story of how they do so.
  South America, the remote jungle where Brazil and Venezuela meet.
  Sheer-sided mountains rise up from the jungle.
  Few places on earth are wetter.
  It's the home of some ancient and very peculiar amphibians.
  The waterfall toad is just an inch long, the size of a postage stamp.
  Its special gripping hands enable it to clamber safely, high in the treetops.
  But it's not alone up here.
  Most frogs and toads avoid predators by hopping out of danger.
  But this toad never evolved the ability to hop for more than an inch,  and that's nowhere near enough.
  One way it gets eaten, the other way is thin air.
  Not much of a choice.
  But this isn't suicide.
  It's a deliberate strategy,  and one that depends on the size and strength of those extraordinary hands.
  Free-falling like this is a very effective way of escaping.
  However, another toad on this same mountain  has elaborated this strategy.
  It lives a mile above the forest on this plateau,  cut off from the world below.
  This is a pebble toad.
  It too is only an inch long.
  These rocks may seem a paradise for a toad.
  It's even wetter than the forest below and there are no snakes.
  But there is a hunter here.
  A toad-eating tarantula.
  It ambushes its prey.
  Like the waterfall toad, the pebble toad can't hop,  but it has a different defence.
  It tenses its muscles, becomes rigid and turns itself into a rubber ball.
  It's so tiny and weighs so little that bouncing doesn't hurt it at all.
  Bizarre innovations like these  are one of the reasons why amphibians and reptiles are still so successful.
  Some of them, however,  have hardly changed for tens of millions of years.
  (TOADS CROAKING)  Brazil's Pantanal.
  Over 50,000 square miles of swamp.
  In the dry season, the water is reduced to isolated pools.
  And then, they contain the greatest concentration of crocodiles on earth.
  (SNARLING)  These caiman crocodiles are trapped and fast running out of food.
  It will be a long time before the rains return and the rivers rise,  bringing with them the caiman's prey, fish.
  Being cold-blooded,  they can go without food for months and stay inactive,  except when they squabble.
  (SNORTING)  (HISSING)  At last, the rains return and rivers swell.
  All reptiles are experts at saving energy.
  The caimans simply line up and wait for the fish to come to them.
  Reptiles and amphibians must warm their bodies  before they can become active  and until then, they are slow-moving and vulnerable.
  The quickest way to gain heat is to bask in the sun,  as this basilisk lizard from Central America is doing.
  The trouble is that exposing yourself inevitably makes you easily seen.
  But a conspicuous perch over a river like this  seems to be making yourself unnecessarily prominent.
  This basilisk's greatest threat comes from the sky.
  Dark shapes overhead make it nervous.
  A hunting bird might expect it to flee to the trees.
  In fact, it does the opposite.
  (SPLASHING)  This skitter across the surface of the water earns it precious seconds,  and the nickname Jesus Christ lizard.
  It drives its feet down so hard and so fast  that it never sinks deeper than a few inches.
  A human would need to run at 65 miles an hour to do this.
  Reptiles are certainly expert at avoiding trouble,  but they're also very good at finding a way to live in places  that don't seem to suit them at all.
  They once included the largest animals that have ever walked the earth,  the dinosaurs.
  And some living ones are a million times smaller than T.
 rex,  smaller indeed than some insects.
  The Brazilian pygmy gecko could sit comfortably on a fingertip.
  It's so exceptionally small that no other reptiles compete with it.
  But it's so nimble it can escape from the hunting monsters of the undergrowth.
  It is so small that it has special problems with, for example, rain.
  It could drown in a drop.
  But its skin is hydrophobic.
  Rain cannot wet it.
  A tumble into a puddle, you might think, would risk death by drowning.
  But the gecko is unsinkable.
  It's so light and its skin so water-repellent  that it can literally stand on water.
  Such miniaturisation is certainly very impressive,  but the reptile body can be transformed even more dramatically.
  One of the most bizarre of all reptiles hunts insects here in Madagascar.
  The praying mantis has 360-degree vision.
  But it hasn't seen the danger that is now approaching.
  A panther chameleon.
  Every part of its body has become specialised  for a life of stealth among the branches.
  Its toes have become grasping pincers.
  Its eyes rotate so it can look in all directions.
  Its skin can change colour for camouflage or to signal emotions.
  The chameleon body is concealed from both predator and prey  so it can launch a surprise attack.
  The tongue is like a missile  aimed at its prey's head to neutralise its defences.
  Chameleons, in short, are so perfectly adapted to a life spent hunting in trees  that it is hard to imagine how they could live anywhere else.
  The Namib Desert.
  There are no trees for hundreds of miles.
  Yet these are undoubtedly chameleon footprints.
  This female Namaqua chameleon is searching for a mate.
  No part of her body seems suited to such an environment.
  Her feet, that could give her such a good grip on twigs,  should surely be useless on soft sand.
  But she's able to spread them like snowshoes.
  She needs to get warm and active while the desert is still cool,  so she exploits the chameleon's versatile skin.
  The side facing the sun goes dark to absorb the sun's heat,  while the other remains light  and minimises the heat escaping from her body.
  She's hungry and food is scarce.
  But she's still not quick enough to grab these desert beetles.
  Her solution is simple.
  She finds at last a little vegetation  and waits for a shade-seeking beetle to come to her.
  On she goes in her search for a mate.
  At last, a wandering male.
  But he may not treat her as she might wish.
  The courtship of most chameleons is gentle.
  But in this desert,  a male meets a female so rarely he can't risk being rejected.
  She marches on, now carrying a new generation.
  A six-month freeze, when temperatures may drop to minus 40 degrees centigrade,  should surely make things impossible for a reptile.
  But here in Canada, beneath the thawing snow, something stirs.
  A male red-sided garter snake.
  He survived the winter by hibernating underground,  where the temperature never dropped below zero.
  The weak sun persuades more males to emerge.
  They are cold and can't move fast, yet they are in an urgent race.
  The first males to warm up will have a head start  when the first females appear.
  Melt water provides the first drink they've had for six months.
  At last, a female has emerged.
  The warmest males will inevitably be the first to react to her smell.
  She will only mate once, so competition between them is intense.
  This male has overslept.
  He will need hours to warm up.
  At the moment, he stands no chance of mating.
  Most of the other males are ready to chase females  but curiously, some leave the race and go to join the cold male.
  They slide their warm bodies over him  just as they would if they were courting a female.
  More and more males crowd round him.
  Why?  Their relative temperatures show what's going on.
  His cool body, showing as blue,  is quickly warming as it absorbs heat from the other males.
  He's a trickster.
  He's fooled the others by giving off a scent just like a female's  and they are trying to mate with him.
  He only needs a few minutes of this to steal enough heat from his rivals  to catch up and join the chase.
  Every spring, tens of thousands of garter snakes  fight it out in this mating frenzy.
  It is, in numbers, the greatest gathering of reptiles in the world.
  Getting a mate is just the first challenge a reptile faces  when it's ready to breed.
  This collared iguana in Madagascar  will only lay one batch of eggs this year,  so she needs somewhere safe to hide them.
  Her eggs are much sought after by predators.
  They are excellent pre-packaged meals.
  She appears to have the answer.
  She covers all traces of where she buried them.
  It's a good strategy.
  But not good enough.
  Hognose snakes have learned to keep watch on iguana nesting sites  and to note the precise place where the eggs lie buried.
  She has been completely outwitted.
  She can only stand by and watch as her precious eggs are eaten.
  Next year, she will have to find a nesting site without a hognose snake.
  On the other side of the world, in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona,  a similar drama has a very different outcome.
  A female horned lizard guards her buried eggs  and is keeping a lookout for anything that might interfere with them.
  A western patchnose snake.
  It is an egg-eater.
  And she won't stand for it.
  The patchnose is no match for this kind of aggression.
  Her eggs are safe, for now.
  Another predator, a coachwhip snake, and this species is a lizard-eater.
  And she can tell the difference.
  The snake is too fast for her to outrun it,  so she makes herself look larger and taller.
  The snake is wary of swallowing anything that looks as big and as spiky as this.
  And now the lizard plays her trump card.
  The snake isn't accustomed to prey that does this.
  One very confused snake.
  Now she can return to guard duty.
  And several months later, she is rewarded with her first baby.
  Looking after your eggs is an even greater challenge for reptiles  that have left land to live in the sea.
  The Pacific island of Niue is home to the world's entire population  of one particular type of sea krait.
  This snake is superbly adapted to life underwater,  except when it's time to breed.
  After a few minutes in a mating coil, the female is fertilised.
  But now she has a problem.
  Reptile eggs can't survive underwater.
  The developing young would drown.
 They have to be able to breathe air.
  She and her eggs are both vulnerable to predators if they return to land.
  But she has an extraordinary solution.
  She dives beneath the island  to find the entrance to a long underwater tunnel.
  At the far end is a cave with an air pocket.
  This is the dry land her eggs need.
  There are no predators here.
  The cavern is sealed by a roof above and the water below.
  She searches for a crevice where she can deposit her eggs.
  The eggs will be completely safe here and she can return to the open sea.
  Six months later, a baby snake takes its first breath.
  Somehow, the young snakes must find their own way to water.
  Then, down the tunnel and out to sea.
  (THUNDER CRACKING)  A male giant bullfrog.
  Reptiles and amphibians rarely care for their young after they hatch  but this South African bruiser is an exception.
  (CROAKING)  The males sort out their dominance through combat.
  The strongest will mate with the most females.
  You might not expect such an aggressive male to be a caring father.
  Yet one male stays behind to watch over not just his own,  but everyone else's offspring.
  The females laid their eggs in the shallows around the margins of the pool.
  But the sun is intense and the shallows have shrunk to a single pool.
  There is a real danger that the tadpoles will be stranded.
  The guardian male recognises the problem.
  They will be dead within an hour unless he can do something to help.
  There is only one thing he can do to save them,  dig a channel to the main pool.
  They are safe.
  Remarkable innovations have made amphibians and reptiles  a modern success story.
  What is more, among their ranks is one reptile  that is still an undisputed top land predator.
  The Komodo dragon.
  They mostly hunt deer, which they ambush and easily overpower.
  But in hard times, the dragons risk hunting something much bigger  water buffalo, an animal ten times their size.
  Until now, a dragon hunt has never been filmed.
  It's the dry season.
  A buffalo sleeps through the heat of the day  in one of the last waterholes.
  Dragons lurk around the margins.
  The buffalo seems to view them as just an irritation, not a danger.
  A serious mistake.
  (GRUNTING)  The dragon is wary.
 A jab or a kick could injure it fatally.
  The bites are just flesh wounds, but other dragons are alert now.
  Like sharks, they are excited by blood.
  The buffalo leaves with just a limp.
  The dragons appear to have failed.
  Yet they show a peculiar interest in the buffalo and follow it wherever it goes.
  As the days pass, the buffalo's wounds don't heal.
  It starts to weaken.
  The dragons' hunting method begins to come clear.
  A brand-new discovery reveals that the dragon has venom, like a snake.
  The bite will eventually prove fatal, but it's going to take several weeks.
  The dragons, however, can afford to wait for a meal of this size.
  They simply stick close to their victim and conserve their energy.
  Thousands of years ago, dwarf elephants lived here.
  The dragons probably hunted them in exactly the same way.
  But the process is a long, drawn-out one.
  Three weeks later and the buffalo is very weak.
  The dragons sense that the end is near.
  They must remain wary.
 The buffalo could still lash out.
  Gradually, they close in to try and finish it off.
  The dragons' strategy is certainly merciless.
  But it is the only way that they can get a meal like this  and in hard times, they need it if they are to survive.
  The buffalo died in the night.
  Ten big dragons have gathered to feed.
  They strip the buffalo to the bone in just four hours.
  This is the biggest venomous animal on the planet.
  We don't need tales of Jurassic Park and Velociraptors  to see a reptile-dominated world.
  It's all here.
  No one has ever before followed the whole process  of a Komodo dragon hunting a buffalo.
  So cameraman Kevin Flay and researcher Matt Swarbrick  didn't know what to expect.
  They thought it would be a physical challenge  but they hadn't bargained for emotional turmoil as well.
  They've reached Komodo after a four-day journey.
  Kevin, an expert at filming reptiles, knows they're in dragon territory.
  SWARBRICK: Look how wide that is.
  - Look at that.
 - Yeah.
  Their only protection is these rangers, armed with sticks.
  These big ones look really scary, actually.
  And not until they come really in close and when they're by the camera,  then you tend to question your faith in our friends with the sticks.
  We got any guys with sticks?  But this dragon isn't a big one.
  At five foot, this dragon is just over half grown.
  The really big ones live inland,  which is exactly where Kevin and Matt must go  to find a place where dragons and buffalo might meet.
  FLAY: We could spend five weeks walking around all over the island  just trying to find dragons randomly coming across buffalos.
  But fortunately for us, it is the dry season  and there's only one decent waterhole left on the island.
  And both the dragons and the buffalo require water, obviously,  which brings them together.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Kevin decides to wait here,  but after a few days with no sign of dragons,  it looks like the wrong decision.
  Oh, here comes a buffalo.
  You know, this is about as exciting as the day gets.
 Look.
  See that?  Hello, mate.
  ATTENBOROUGH: After almost a week, something changes  and a couple of dragons appear.
  - Have we got a ranger here? - Guys, can we have a ranger?  (WHISPERING) Always know how dangerous a situation is.
  But it does seem a bit concerning that one of our rangers is sat up in a tree.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But the dragons show no interest in the buffalo or the crew,  and the frustration continues.
  Yet their task seems so simple.
  SWARBRICK: So, what we need is for him  to film him attacking him.
  But it looks like he is about to attack him.
  Just cut myself.
 That's not good in dragon country.
  (CHUCKLES) I'd better be careful.
  We've got to start now.
 We've got to start our walk home.
  It takes just over an hour but the thing is, if stuff's happened  and you've managed to film good stuff, then it's really easy.
  You just trot on home and find some dinner  and find out what the rats have done to your room.
  But it's still really hot at this time of day  and so if you've not filmed a lot and you've just sat here all day long,  then it's a hell of a long walk home.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They have a lot of long walks home.
  But finally, a new dragon appears.
  Something about its attitude seems different.
  Maybe we could be on to something.
  But I've now lost the other dragon, which makes me a bit nervous.
  ATTENBOROUGH: At first it's wary,  unwilling to get too close to the buffalo.
  (WHISPERING) Big dragons involved here.
 Somewhere.
  That came from absolutely nowhere.
  That guy has got some real attitude.
  ATTENBOROUGH: That first bite and the smell of blood  set off a chain reaction.
  All the dragons seem to come to life.
  The peaceful watering hole is now a dangerous place to be.
  I've definitely got two heads at the moment.
  One as a cameramen saying, "Yes, brilliant!"  And the other one is thinking, "That poor animal.
"  You know, that's not nice.
 That's really not nice.
  - RANGER 1: Careful.
 - Here it comes, here it comes.
  - RANGER 2: Camera, camera.
 - Got it.
  SWARBRICK: Nice.
  Quickly, quickly, quickly.
  My heart's pumping a bit.
  (CHUCKLES)  At least my heart still works.
 Good lord, that was a bit hairy.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Now the crew must follow the buffalo every day  to finish their filming job.
  This begins to take a toll on their emotions.
  He knows he's injured, he can't walk properly,  and you've got these predators just  gathering around him, waiting for the opportunity.
  It's gruesome.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Shadowing the buffalo means staying close to the dragons, too.
  This is mad.
 We've just followed the buffalo  and I think six dragons? I've lost track now,  I think it's six dragons, down into the riverbed.
  And, you know, they're stalking it.
  We're all a bit nervous.
  It's actually quite frightening, I have to say.
  SWARBRICK: They're so capable and so unafraid of us  and they would have no problems at all causing us major, major damage.
  At the moment, I feel about 5 to 10% confident that I'm safe here.
  But the truth is we just don't know.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the days pass,  Kevin and Matt can't help but feel more deeply involved.
  And I'm sure they're starting to think of us as death, you know,  this camera team, because although we're not influencing it in any way, really,  we're always there when the dragons are there  and, you know, she's sick, so we're following her.
  And you see her looking back at you and I'm sure I feel like, you know,  Death and his scythe coming in to kill.
  I'm not really that sure how cut out I am for this.
  If the game is spending all your time watching an animal die,  I don't know about that.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The dragons seem brutal,  yet this is the only way they can get large prey.
  For the team, the event has become personal.
  SWARBRICK: I think as we've got to know him,  and, you know, we see him every morning, we see him every evening, you know,  you build up a relationship with him.
  And today I think he kind of gave up.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The next day, it is all over.
  FLAY: Now it's over, you sit back and reflect, you sort of feel,  "That was just astonishing.
"  And it feels so primeval.
  It feels you're watching something from a different era.
  And they really are the most fantastic things to be with.
  Scary,  awesome, you know, to look at,  you just feel that you are looking at something from Jurassic Park.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: Antarctica.
  The Earth's coldest continent,  the one that is most hostile to life.
  Here, 1,300 kilometres from the South Pole,  it's 40 degrees below zero.
  Of all the millions of species of animals on Earth,  only one can live here permanently.
  (GRUNTS)  A Weddell seal.
  She can survive because she can dive below the ice.
  Here, she is protected from the storms above  and here, too, she can find food.
  But she is a mammal and she has to breathe air.
  So she has to keep a lifeline open to the world above the ice.
  Not only for her, but now for her newborn pup.
  He's less than a week old and still very vulnerable.
  A blizzard blows in and with it storm-force winds.
  It could last for a week.
  Being mammals, seals can generate heat within their bodies.
  And their fur, with a thick layer of fat beneath it,  prevents most of that heat from escaping,  even in cold conditions like this.
  What is more, she is able to feed her youngster  with that mammalian speciality, milk.
  And while she does so, she shields him from the worst of the blizzard.
  She has worked hard throughout the winter  to prevent her breathing hole in the ice from freezing over.
  That requires constant attention,  filing back the edges of the hole with her teeth.
  Her pup needs to join her under the ice as soon as he can swim properly.
  She encourages him to take his first plunge  but hardly surprisingly, he's not keen.
  Now, guided by his mother, he has to learn how to hunt underwater  and to find his way back through the maze  to his hole in the ice.
  A warm body, fur, milk and maternal care  are essential for the Weddell seals' survival  in this freezing environment.
  And those qualities have helped the mammals  to colonise the entire globe.
  Equatorial East Africa.
  It's hard to imagine a place more different from Antarctica.
  To survive here, mammals need additional talents.
  This tree shelters the territory of a tiny mammal  that spends its whole life in frenzied activity.
  It used to be called an elephant shrew,  but now it's called by its African name of sengi.
  This is a female rufous sengi.
  And like all sengis, she's so active, she's permanently hungry.
  To get all the food she needs,  she has to be both industrious and ingenious.
  She has made an intricate network of trails  that enable her to hunt her insect prey very efficiently.
  But these pathways have another important function  when she meets her enemies.
  Having a map of these trails in her head can mean the difference between life  and death.
  Like most mammals, and unlike reptiles, her legs are directly beneath her body.
  That makes her less stable, but much faster and more agile.
  Not only has she outrun this reptile, she's outwitted him.
  And just as well,  for she is a mother and has a youngster to care for.
  The sengi relies on speed and cunning for its success.
  Other mammals have very different techniques.
  Here in Madagascar,  one of the most bizarre of all mammals is on the prowl.
  The aye-aye, like the sengi, lives on insects.
  But the ones that she seeks she can't see,  for they're buried deep inside branches.
  They're beetle grubs.
  To find them, she has a special talent.
  She taps her fingers on the wood, up to eight times a second,  and listens for the tiny change in resonance  that indicates a hollow spot within.
  Her hearing is so acute she can identify the precise position  in which to gnaw a hole in order to reach the grub.
  And she has a grotesquely long middle finger with which to skewer it.
  It takes a young aye-aye four years to perfect this technique.
  But once it has done so, it can collect prey  that no other mammal can reach.
  (BIRDS SQUAWKING)  The Arctic tundra.
  Food is hard to find here, too.
  Indeed, this land is so barren that few large animals can live here.
  Yet one mammal has found a way to do so.
  It's late spring,  and as the mounting strength of the sun warms the land,  eight million reindeer move north.
  But the vegetation is so meagre  that the only way the herds can get enough  is to keep constantly on the move.
  Newborn calves soon discover that they will have to spend every day  walking in search of food.
  They have extraordinary endurance.
  Some of these animals, before they die, will have trekked for a distance  equivalent to three times around the earth.
  Grazing is now at its best.
  But this is also the time when the reindeer's worst enemy appears.
  (FLIES BUZZING)  Biting flies.
  The flies not only drive them to distraction,  but they can drain a pint of blood each day.
  But the reindeer have a defensive strategy.
  Each individual tries to push its way into the centre of a group  where there are fewer flies.
  With all this pushing and jostling, mothers need to keep their calves close.
  Sometimes, the flies become so bad  that the reindeer can stand them no longer  and they bolt to higher ground where the flies can't follow.
  But the price of escape can be high.
  In the rush, one mother has lost her calf.
  (GRUNTING)  Others have already found it.
  (SQUAWKING)  The herd has long since moved on.
  But her maternal instinct is so strong,  she'll stay to search for her missing calf for days.
  The reindeer are free from flies for now.
  But with no food on these high slopes,  they will eventually be forced to descend  to find new pastures and face the biting swarms once more.
  No animal makes a longer migration across the lands of the Earth  than these mammals.
  Other mammals have found a more economic way  of travelling huge distances, and at greater speed.
  They go by air.
  (CHIRPING AND TWITTERING)  (SCREECHING)  Giant straw-coloured fruit bats inhabit the Great Forest of the Congo.
  Their wings are nearly a metre across.
  In late October every year,  they set off on a long journey across the forest canopy.
  Flocks of hundreds become thousands.
  And tens of thousands become hundreds of thousands.
  They're fast and powerful fliers  and can travel more than a thousand kilometres in just a few nights.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  How they know where and when to travel is a mystery.
  But they all end up in one place,  Kasanka, a remote swamp in Zambia.
  (BATS SCREECHING)  There are ten million of them here.
  They crowd together in just one small patch of forest  no bigger than two or three football pitches.
  And here they take up residence for a few weeks.
  It's the largest fruit bat roost on earth.
  After their long journey, they need to rest and relax.
  The roost is so crowded  that complete strangers rub shoulders and even snuggle up together.
  As evening approaches,  they prepare to reap the reward for their long journey.
  They've come from all over Central Africa  to this one place because here, at this time of year,  there is an extraordinary glut of mangoes and other fruit.
  Streaming out from the roost, they set off to collect it.
  Each bat guzzles at least two kilos' worth of fruit every night.
  In just a few weeks, this megaroost  will devour more than a billion separate fruits.
  It's only the power of flight that allows these mammals  to travel so far and so fast that they can reap such a brief harvest.
  After six weeks, the trees have been stripped of their fruit.
  Then, once again, the immense aerial armada takes to the air,  each bat returning to its own particular patch  of the vast Congo forests.
  The land mammals of Africa  also travel together in stupendous numbers.
  The herds that graze the East African plains  are not nearly the size they were a century ago,  but they are still immense.
  Grazing together is a good defence.
 There's safety in numbers.
  But hunting together also brings advantages.
  This hyena, however, is searching for food on her own.
  She needs to be careful.
  But she smells food and she takes risks.
  (HYENA SCREECHING)  (ROARING)  Bruised and bloodied, she is lucky to have survived her mistake.
  But she's not totally defeated.
  She belongs to a clan.
  (HYENA HOWLING)  A call to arms rings out through the night.
  Reinforcements assemble.
  Every adult in the clan responds.
  If a clan attack together,  they have a chance of challenging the lions.
  (ROARING)  It's a clan against a pride, each at full strength.
  And the clan outnumbers the pride.
  The combined power of the hyenas eventually forces the lions to retreat.
  Attacking as a coherent team requires a high degree of social cooperation  and that is another of the mammal's specialities.
  Social bonds between mammals begin when mothers feed their young on milk.
  And few look after their young with greater care  than the mammal which dominates this landscape.
  A female polar bear is trying to find food for her cubs.
  But this is a particularly difficult time of the year.
  The sea ice on which she hunts is melting beneath her feet.
  She must look for food on land.
  They're all safely ashore.
  But they could still face months of hunger.
  Finding food is not so easy on this cold and barren coast.
  The search may be a long one.
  Polar bears have an extraordinarily sensitive sense of smell,  and she has caught a faint whiff of something promising.
  It's the immense carcass of a bowhead whale.
  A whale carcass could provide more than any one family could eat.
  But they're not the first here to find it,  by any means.
  The smell has brought in bears from miles away.
  (GROWLING)  Bear families seldom get on with one another.
  She's taking a risk bringing her cubs here.
  Male bears can and do kill and eat small cubs.
  Another family challenges her.
  She must decide whether to compete for food  or run away and go hungry.
  She keeps her cubs close to her and stands her ground.
  Their mother's courage has won the cubs a meal.
  Living as a family may bring rewards, but it can also create problems,  for siblings can also become rivals.
  A coati, a South American relative of the raccoon.
  These babies were born in a nest high in a tree  and are about to come down to the ground for the first time.
  Some more reluctantly than others.
  (SQUEAKING)  Once on the ground, the mother coati rounds her babies up  and takes them away to join a single large group.
  Together, these families form a gang up to 40 strong.
  Once again, numbers bring safety.
  The first to spot danger will warn everyone.
  But keeping order isn't easy.
  And when they find food, it's a free-for-all.
  Meerkats in the Kalahari Desert also live in large groups  but they're rather more organised.
  Each family band is controlled by a queen,  who is nearly always the only female to breed.
  She has been kept very busy suckling her five pups.
  And it's high time they became more independent.
  Today is the new brood's first trip to get breakfast for themselves.
  It takes weeks for youngsters to learn how to find food.
  This one is trying to catch ants,  but hasn't quite grasped the necessary technique.
  But this youngster has persuaded an adult  to show him what to do.
  The tutor is not his parent, just an enthusiastic instructor,  and one who will adapt his lessons to the ability of his student.
  This new one is a beginner, so he starts with something easy,  how to dig for insect larvae.
  Other meals, like this one, are much trickier.
  So, the tutor disables the scorpion's sting  before he lets the youngster tackle it.
  The family also cooperates in defence.
  Every member does a tour of guard duty, keeping an eye out for danger.
  So, while one watches, everyone else can rest.
  And on warm days, one can easily nod off.
  The secret of meerkats' success  is that everyone takes a turn in communal duties.
  (CHATTERING)  But many mammals do more than just share their workload.
  Some can share their knowledge, and do so across several generations.
  Elephant survival depends on profiting from the experience of many lifetimes.
  This baby elephant was born last night  and the whole herd seems to welcome this new addition.
  (BELLOWING)  But the mother is young and inexperienced.
  This is her first baby.
  If she is to produce milk, a mother must drink.
  And the newborn calf must keep up with her  as the herd continues on their long journey to find water.
  After eight kilometres, the calf is flagging.
  Enough is enough.
  The young mother encourages her calf to continue  but there is still a long way to go  and the calf is already getting dehydrated.
  The elephants are now so close to water that they can smell it.
  Water at last!  This is the calf's first encounter with a waterhole.
  She's not sure what to make of it, or indeed, how to get out of it.
  Her mother tries to help her  but she has no experience of dealing with babies.
  (TRUMPETS)  As the herd moves deeper into the swamp, the calf follows.
  But now, she is in real trouble.
  (TRUMPETING)  Elephant babies can and do get permanently stuck in deep mud.
  Her mother's attempts to help her baby are only making matters worse.
  It's stuck beneath her and she's pushing it deeper still.
  But now, the baby's grandmother spots the problem and steps in.
  (BELLOWING)  Drastic action.
  She pushes Mother out of the way with an unceremonious poke in the rump  and enables her granddaughter to scramble free.
  Mother and calf have learned a valuable lesson from Grandma.
  Such passing of wisdom across generations  has been an important element in the survival of elephants.
  The largest animal on land, the elephant, is a mammal.
  And so are the largest animals in the sea.
  A female humpback whale and her calf.
  Every few years, she will travel nearly 5,000 kilometres,  from the rich waters of the Antarctic  to these warm but comparatively sterile waters of the Pacific,  to give birth to a single calf.
  The seas around Tonga are not only a nursery for humpbacks,  but also their mating ground.
  This 50-year-old female has come here to seek the best partner.
  And she starts by announcing her arrival to potential suitors.
  One by one, the males arrive.
  (WHALES CALLING)  But as they do, she swims away,  compelling her half-a-dozen or so suitors to follow her.
  She leads, while the males jockey for position behind her.
  The males bellow threats to one another, creating huge plumes of bubbles.
  So far, it has been a relatively gentle affair.
  Now the competition becomes serious.
  Hour after hour, the males battle for position right behind her.
  And now, the 40-ton males begin to smash into one another.
  This is the most massive battle in all nature.
  Rival males can kill one another.
  As the conflict reaches its climax, they try to force each other downwards.
  At last, a victor takes his place alongside the female  and remains unchallenged.
  By inciting the males to fight,  the female has secured the best mate for herself,  the one who is most likely to father the strongest offspring.
  Together, the couple dive to the depths.
  But still, no one knows where they will mate.
  All mammals, including ourselves, share a set of winning characteristics.
  Warm bodies, extraordinary senses and highly developed intelligence.
  And those qualities have contributed to their and our success.
  But perhaps the most important characteristic of all  lies in the strength of our family ties.
  It is the mammal family that has conquered the Earth.
  (BELLOWING)  Tonga is famous for humpback whales  but even here, finding and filming whales in the open ocean  would prove challenging.
  For the Life team,  capturing the humpback whales' unique mating contest,  known as a heat run, would need local knowledge,  hours on the water and a big slice of luck.
  We've heard that one of the boats, further in land by Submarine Rock,  has seen a female with a calf and an escort,  which is something which might build to hopefully a heat run.
  So we're gonna head over there and take a look.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Any adult female with a calf could be coming into season  and so might be a target for amorous males.
  MUNNS: When we got there I was pretty excited,  a little bit nervous, I didn't know what to expect.
  Once I got in the water and dived down,  it was surprisingly quiet and mellow.
  I certainly didn't expect what happened next.
  The calf just came straight up towards me.
  She seemed really relaxed and definitely interested in me.
  It's literally just swimming around  within metres of them, flicking its tail,  just being inquisitive, I think, and having a bit of fun.
  It's obviously quite young,  so it's staying on the surface quite a long time.
  It's not diving down for very long, maybe a couple of minutes.
  And the mother will be about five or ten metres below,  just keeping an eye on it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But even a calf has great power in its fins and tail.
  Roger will need to be careful.
  Got it?  That was the most silly thing I've ever seen in my life.
  He's just gambolling around like a little newborn lamb,  but it weighs two tons.
  (BOTH LAUGHING)  A couple of bumps,  it would just come round, flash its fluke at me or whatever.
  I got a great shot of it chasing Jase around.
  Jason is back-pedalling like this, back to the boat.
  JASON: It's just a baby, like a little puppy,  you're playing with a little puppy, but it's four metres long.
  - It's just ludicrous.
 - Was his mum all right?  She is just totally chilling out underneath, pecs back,  just hanging like this at about 15 metres.
  GUY: Just watching? MUNNS: Yeah.
 Just hanging out,  probably didn't even see it, I don't think.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It's one thing to be close to a playful baby,  it will be another to be in the path  of a testosterone-charged group of males,  each 10 times her size.
  There's one back there.
  ATTENBOROUGH: There are enough males here for a heat run.
  But are they in the mood?  (ALL EXCLAIMING)  GUY: Yes!  Looks pretty good.
  - When you guys are ready.
 - Let's go.
  Quick as you can.
  Okay, guys.
  SIMON BLAKENEY: These whales can weigh up to 40 tons  and things are moving surprisingly quickly,  so as well as getting the camera in position to get the shots,  which they have to be fairly close,  we have to be really careful that they don't get bumped or hit.
  If they get a knock from one of these guys,  it can do them some serious damage.
  Coming right towards you.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To avoid disturbing the whales' behaviour,  the team need to free dive without scuba tanks,  holding their breath as long as they can.
  MUNNS: On a good dive, I can hold my breath for maybe two minutes.
  These guys, they can go for 20 minutes or more  before they have to come up for a breath.
  There's no contest.
  ATTENBOROUGH: More and more whales are gathering.
  But it's not turning into a heat run yet.
  Hard to say what was going on then.
  - Were there five that time? - Five, yeah.
  MUNNS: They're kind of moving around, coming up and under and over,  and hopefully something's starting to happen.
  Maybe love's in the air?  (LAUGHS)  ATTENBOROUGH: Love maybe in the air, but it isn't in the water.
  Despite keeping tabs on the whales over the next 10 days,  there was still no sign of a heat run starting.
  You'd think it'd be quite easy to keep track of a 40-ton animal  and we've got six of them out here and we keep losing them.
  One minute they're there, we get up reasonably close,  within 30 seconds they've dived and they're gone again.
  And then it takes another maybe five minutes, 10 minutes,  and then they'll come up again and they'll be 300 yards away,  and it takes ages just to get close to them.
  So, we just play a continuous game of cat and mouse.
  "Cat and mouse?" It's whales.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The mating season is coming to an end  and the crew haven't completed their mission.
  But then, at last, the whales' behaviour seems to have changed.
  Well, this is it.
  We've just spotted about six or seven humpbacks on the horizon  and we think it's a heat run.
  The last 16-17 days on the water  are probably going to come down to the next two hours  as to whether we get our shots or not.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The chase is on.
  There was at least three or four whales going past then  and they're all competing, knocking into each other and crossing  as they try to get in the pole position behind the female.
  That's right at you.
 It's right at you.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The whales are moving so fast  that to stand any chance of filming them,  the crew needs to be dropped right in front of the charging group.
  Just as Roger gets alongside the males,  the tempo of the chase suddenly shifts to a full-bore with the flick of a tail.
  Facing the charging males deep underwater,  Roger keeps shooting, holding his breath until the group pass over.
  A quick gasp of air and Roger's back down again.
  The whales continue to rush by.
  In the end, Roger just can't keep up any longer.
  Exhausted, it's time to return to the boat for the last time.
  Amazing!  That was the most amazing experience I've ever had.
  There were about seven or eight,  we both dived down about 20 metres in front.
  And then the female came through fast, quite close,  and then they all just started diving towards me, so it was just sort of  like standing in a stream of traffic.
  They were just sort of one one side, one the next side, one the next side.
  And then after about 40-45 seconds, I was getting a little bit out of breath  and then, sort of, looked up  and there's one sitting right on top of me.
  - Did you get it? - I think so.
 I hope so.
  If not, we're both fired.
  (BOTH LAUGHING)  ATTENBOROUGH: It's taken 18 days and hundreds of dives  but at last the team have been able to reveal  a secret of these whales' lives that few people have ever seen.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: Ours is truly a blue planet.
  Water covers most of the world's surface.
  Here, we are the outsiders.
  But under the waves, one group thrives.
  Fish.
  Fish are masters of the waters.
  And sailfish are the fastest of them all.
  Their speed makes them one of the ocean's most fearsome predators.
  Off the coast of Mexico,  30 sailfish have surrounded a ball of sardines.
  To catch their prey requires more than speed alone.
  In the tightest turns, fins maintain stability.
  Their sickle-shaped tail powers them forwards  and that extraordinary dorsal fin helps intimidate their prey.
  To the naked eye, the action is too fast.
  Slowed, their challenge becomes clear.
  Just picking a target is hard enough.
  Knocking it off balance separates it from the shoal.
  This requires extraordinary skill.
  Not every attempt is successful.
  But as more sailfish join in,  when one misses, another takes its place.
  The shoal of sardines is methodically wiped out.
  Sailfish are top predators, very little threatens them.
  But for the majority of fish, this is not the case.
  For most fish, the open ocean is extremely dangerous.
  And some go to extraordinary lengths just to survive.
  Flying fish.
  Free of the water, they soar on elongated fins,  leaving their predators far behind.
  A flight of fish.
  Escaping predators is not the only test facing the flying fish.
  They must also protect their developing young.
  These flying fish are searching for the one thing  that will make this possible.
  In such a vast ocean it's not easy.
  They're in luck.
  A palm frond.
  It's a tiny island adrift in a huge ocean.
  And like an island, it offers shelter,  not for the flying fish but for their eggs.
  The females lay eggs on the raft, where the males fertilise them.
  The first fish spawn and this triggers the others to start.
  Soon, thousands join the melee.
  Innumerable strands of eggs are laid.
  The raft starts to tilt under their weight.
  The best place to lay eggs is right inside the frond.
  For some, the attempt proves fatal  and living fish become entombed.
  The raft starts to sink under the weight of so many eggs.
  But this is far from a disaster.
  Sinking away from the surface  actually improves the eggs' chances of survival.
  In just a few days,  having been safely hidden in the depths, they'll hatch out.
  Other fish protect their offspring in different ways.
  Some go to far greater lengths to care for them.
  The shallow waters of southern Australia are home to many strange creatures.
  It's a fairytale world of seahorses,  stargazers  and stingrays.
  But none compare with the beauty of the weedy sea dragon.
  The dragon's tiny fins beat frantically  to prevent the current from sweeping it away.
  It's the beginning of spring,  the season when sea dragons begin their courtship.
  And in the evening light, they start to dance.
  In a graceful duet, each partner mirrors the actions of the other.
  Darkness will soon draw a veil over the pair,  but they will dance on into the night.
  Two months later and the result of their courtship is revealed.
  It's the male  and he's the one that's carrying the eggs,  with rows and rows of them embedded in his tail.
  That night, the female transferred her eggs to him.
  Since then, the male alone has cared for them.
  By carrying them with him, he's kept them safe.
  And now it's time for his efforts to be rewarded.
  The eggs are ready to hatch.
  In the calm of a summer morning,  a baby sea dragon, with yolk sac still attached, is born.
  The weed bed shelters older dragons  that are already able to feed themselves.
  Although these dragons were well cared for by their father,  now they must find their own way in the world.
  There are fish, however, which provide their young  with a safe refuge for far longer.
  The Southwestern Pacific.
  A convict fish, and it's something of a marine architect.
  Underground, it has created a labyrinth of tunnels.
  This adult never ventures out of its burrow.
  What it eats is a mystery.
  But it doesn't live here alone.
  At another entrance, faces peer out.
  Juvenile convict fish.
  Unlike their parent, the youngsters are not tied to the burrow.
  And as they start to emerge, a trickle becomes a flood of fish.
  There are thousands of them.
  And they all help with the chores.
  Many hands make light work.
  The young fish swarm together thousands of miles, gulping plankton.
  What the adults eat must somehow involve these youngsters.
  Whether the young feed their parents by regurgitating food  or through some other mechanism, we just don't know.
  Whatever the answer, the youngsters provide their parents with a meal  and in return, get a roof over their heads.
  Producing young is just one challenge.
  Finding food and somewhere to live are further trials fish must face.
  The Californian coast.
 A wide range of species live here.
  But all this life means competition for living space is intense.
  Old shells are highly prized.
  And this one is occupied by a sarcastic fringehead.
  These fish are exceptionally quarrelsome.
  They have to be to defend their living space.
  An octopus.
  Inadvertently, it's wandered into the fringehead's territory  and that can't be tolerated.
  The octopus' impressive jab holds the fringehead at bay.
  There is more to this behaviour than being bad-tempered.
  The fringehead needs to defend its patch if it is to get enough to eat  and the octopus was competition.
  Crabs are not the easiest of mouthfuls.
  Because of the shortage of living space, there are constant boundary disputes,  especially with other fringeheads.
  And this one has got too close.
  Despite the most extravagant threats,  neither is prepared to back down.
  Success.
 And it's quick to get back to its shell.
  A fringehead can never drop its guard, there's too much competition.
  Some fish have moved to places where they have fewer rivals.
  A mudskipper, a fish that spends most of its life out of the sea.
  It can walk on land and breathe air.
  Its life is very different from that of most fish.
  A fish out of water, maybe.
  But they thrive here in Japan.
  So what's made this upheaval worthwhile?  The answer lies in the mud.
  As the tide retreats, it exposes mudflats.
  Sunlight hits the rich silt  and tiny plants and animals flourish there.
  All food for a mudskipper.
  (CROAKS)  But life on land is not without problems.
  It's hard work to find a mate.
  Jumping high above the mud will get you noticed.
  With eyes perched on the top of their heads,  the mudskippers keep a lookout for both friend and foe.
  And males fight those who intrude on their territory.
  They must also take care not to dry out in the sun.
  Rolling in the ooze keeps the skin cool and moist.
  For this smaller species,  a better option is to retreat underground.
  So he digs himself a tunnel down into the mud.
  His heap of spoil is an indication of the extent of his excavations.
  With the tide flooding the tunnel twice a day,  maintenance is a real burden.
  The tunnel is more than a refuge from the sun.
  It serves another very important purpose.
  The tunnel is actually U-shaped.
  And at the far end is a sealed chamber,  the walls of which are lined with eggs.
  The eggs are kept in air, as it's richer in oxygen than the water.
  The problem is the air that's trapped here won't last for long.
  So the male travels to the open end of the tunnel to gulp fresh air.
  Back he goes down his tunnel, where he releases it into the egg chamber,  replenishing the oxygen on which the eggs depend.
  He will repeat this hundreds and hundreds of times,  until his young hatch.
  This lifestyle is very demanding,  yet the mudskipper has found a way around every problem.
  The harsh challenges of life in the ocean  have encouraged other fish to leave the sea.
  Not for land, but for fresh water.
  Hawaii is the remotest island chain on the planet.
  These pools look the perfect place for a fish to live,  secluded and free from competition and predators.
  Yet few contain fish, for one very considerable reason.
  Surely no fish could swim up this.
  But one fish comes from the ocean intent on colonising these streams.
  It's a tiny goby and it's a rock climber.
  With pelvic fins fused into a disk which acts like a sucker,  all the goby needs is a film of water to climb through.
  The pioneer is soon followed by many others,  possibly following its scent trail.
  They clamber on, ever upwards against the flow.
  Drops of water fall like bombs.
  False leads waste crucial energy.
  Some must rest.
  For others, the effort is just too much.
  Many die in their attempt to reach the top.
  Against all the odds,  a few heroic individuals do make it to the top.
  They find themselves in a near perfect fish habitat,  where the gobies can feed and grow and breed in peace.
  In time, their own young will be swept downstream and out to sea  and the cycle will begin all over again.
  Fresh water presents particular challenges for fish.
  Nutrients can be in very short supply in spring water,  so here, fish must take every chance they can to find food.
  The rain that falls on these Kenyan hills  percolates through the rocks,  finally emerging as crystal-clear pools  pools that are home to fish including barbel.
  The fish share these waters with all sorts of creatures  including hippopotamus.
  (GRUNTING)  These giant vegetarians are no threat to the fish.
  In fact, they're key to their survival here.
  After a night of grazing on land,  these hippos return to spend the daylight hours in the cooling waters.
  And the barbel come to meet them.
  Soon, each hippo is trailed by a shoal of fish  waiting for their breakfast,  hippo droppings.
  But it's not just the hippo's dung the fish are interested in.
  When the hippos reach one particular spot in the pool,  they stand still and wait.
  And the fish start to clean them,  removing ticks, parasites and other tasty morsels.
  To the fish, the hippos are a mobile cafeteria.
  The hippos seem to be enjoying the sensation.
  The only thing that interrupts the feast  is the need to take an occasional breath.
  Cleaning the hippo's skin was just the hors d'oeuvre.
  Now it's time for the main course.
  So in addition to providing skin care,  the fish look after the hippo's dental hygiene.
  It's an arrangement that suits both parties.
  But perhaps it's the fish that are the overall winners.
  For thanks to the hippos, they are able to feed on the abundant vegetation  that would otherwise be beyond their reach,  growing around their pool on land.
  Providing a cleaning service is clearly a good way of getting a meal.
  And there is cleaning to be done in the sea as well.
  The life of this wrasse is centred on removing parasites from other reef fish,  including predatory Jacks.
  Normally, they would snap up such a little fish,  but this is an established relationship and both sides know the rules.
  With so many Jacks and only a few wrasse in attendance,  not all the Jacks are going to get cleaned.
  But all this life attracts other predators.
  Silvertip sharks.
  The reef provides shelter for the smaller fish,  but the Jacks remain exposed.
  Yet this may be a chance for the Jacks to solve their cleaning problem.
  They've spotted an opportunity.
  Sharks have skin like sandpaper.
  And bumping into the sharks' flanks  helps the Jacks to rid themselves of parasites and dead skin.
  Perhaps the Jacks find this a more effective alternative  to the cleaner fish.
  And soon swarms of Jacks pursue the sharks,  all itching to have a scratch.
  Unsurprisingly, all this attention bothers the sharks  and they head back to the blue water,  leaving the residents of the reef to resume life as normal.
  Coral reefs are the richest habitats on Earth.
  It's not surprising that with so many different kinds of animals  living so closely together,  some extraordinary relationships have evolved.
  The clownfish, a small and defenceless resident of the reef.
  It seems to have picked a tough place to live,  amongst the tentacles of the sea anemone.
  Each tentacle is armed with paralysing stings that can kill a fish.
  Yet the clownfish are totally immune.
  For this pair, the anemone is like a castle.
  So long as they stay surrounded by the tentacles, they're safe.
  And so this is where they choose to lay their eggs.
  After carefully selecting the site, work begins on preparing the surface.
  Both fish share in the labour,  though it's the larger female who decides when all is ready.
  Lines and lines of tiny eggs are stuck to the rock and then fertilised.
  They're laid so close to the anemone, they will be safe.
  And for the next seven days, they'll receive constant care,  much of which is provided by the male.
  His seemingly obsessive concern for the eggs is for good reason.
  His position in the anemone is far from secure.
  The female watches his every move.
  She's in charge here  and if his efforts don't match up to her standards, she'll get rid of him.
  In line to take over are a host of immature clownfish,  each waiting to move up the hierarchy.
  For the male, the best way to stay in the female's favour  is by lavishing care on the eggs.
  So he focuses all his efforts on keeping them clean and healthy.
  The eggs grow rapidly and soon their tiny beating hearts are visible.
  It seems he's done a good job.
  Clownfish can hide away within an anemone.
  But most fish don't have this option.
  For some, the only way of avoiding danger  is by hiding amongst their own kind,  in shoals.
  Packed close together, no one anchovy stands out.
  By sensing and reacting to the movements of their immediate neighbours,  thousands can move as one.
  For a predator, picking out an individual becomes nearly impossible.
  The shoal's unity is its strength.
  Yet each fish is acting from selfish motives.
  Moving together, the fish confuse the sea lions so much  that they leave to look elsewhere for a smaller, less tricky target.
  The sheer size of the shoal defeated the sea lions,  but there are fish that can overcome such strategies.
  Off the coast of South Africa,  this huge shoal of sardines is shadowed by a ragged-tooth shark.
  Other sharks join the menacing escort.
  The shoal has been driven into the shallows by a cold ocean current  and this gives the sharks an opportunity.
  Hundreds have moved into position.
  Sharks have a special sense.
  They can detect the electrical signals their prey gives off when it moves.
  It's a sixth sense that can give them an edge.
  But with hundreds of thousands of fish crammed into the shallows,  the sharks need only rely on their speed and agility.
  As the first shark starts to hunt in earnest,  a feeding frenzy breaks out.
  The shoal's defences are weakened.
  There isn't enough space to manoeuvre.
  And the sharks can gorge themselves.
  Despite the casualties, the shoal is so vast  that the sharks have little effect on its size.
  Fish not only come together in great shoals for defence,  but at other critical times in their lives  when they're ready to spawn.
  These events only occur for a few days each year.
  Snapper are normally solitary,  but they've travelled here from hundreds of miles away  to gather off the coast of Belize.
  Along this one reef, cubera, dog and mutton snapper form huge shoals.
  60 metres down, there is an eerie coolness to the scene.
  But things are about to hot up.
  It's the evening of the full moon, the tides are just right.
  A great column of fish leaves the bottom.
  As they rise through the water, small groups break free of the shoal.
  Each burst is led by a female with the males racing behind.
  As she sheds her eggs, they add their sperm to the mix.
  By synchronising the time when they gather together,  the maximum numbers of fish can join in this mass spawning.
  Millions of fertilised eggs are released, cast into the ocean currents  and straight into a dangerous world.
  Whale sharks, the largest fish on Earth.
  Each shark might weigh 10 tons,  yet they feed on the tiniest creatures, including snapper eggs.
  Life is being created, sustained and destroyed simultaneously  in one huge event.
  The struggle for life encapsulated into a single moment.
  The oceans are perilous places to live,  yet fish have developed the most extraordinary means for survival.
  Their astounding diversity,  the product of millions of years of evolution,  has enabled them to triumph,  dominating the one habitat  that we have so far failed to make our own.
  Filming underwater raised all sorts of problems for the Life team,  not least of which was that they were only able  to experience the underwater world  for as long as the air on their backs or in their lungs held out.
  But over three years, the team were lucky enough to capture on film  some extraordinary moments in the lives of fish.
  The waters off the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico  are a rich hunting ground for sailfish.
  Cameraman Rick Rosenthal  has teamed up with sport fishing captain Anthony Mendillo  to try and film the hunting behaviour of these amazing animals.
  MENDILLO: It's fish.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Feeding birds lead them to the sailfish.
  - Right here.
 - Right here.
  Getting to the bait balls and into the water quickly is key  before the feast is consumed.
  MENDILLO: Get ready.
  Or they're gonna eat it, then we'll be screwed.
  Everybody hang on.
  They're out there swimming now, now.
  Come on, get in there.
  It's all very well telling Rick to hurry,  but these fish are capable of swimming at over 60 miles an hour.
  Just keeping up with them is hard enough.
  Getting right in amongst the action is vital,  but Rick has to try to avoid becoming part of it.
  Bills nearly one metre long,  scything through the water at breakneck speed,  are guaranteed to get the heart racing.
  But Rick holds his nerve  as the sailfish pick off sardine after sardine right in front of him.
  Almost as soon as it started, it was all over.
  Had a wild sea show out there today.
 Really wild.
  Must have been 50 sailfish if there were 49.
  But very aggressive fish, very hungry, everybody on the move.
  And I had to just keep kicking and kicking and kicking  and kicking and kicking and kicking to keep in the action.
  But after a while the sardine patch was eaten up to just a little sliver.
  And then it was over.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Nearly 2,000 miles away on the other side of the Caribbean,  another crew is taking a slightly different approach.
  They are trying to film flying fish.
  The team sets out at dawn on the Hog Snapper, a commercial fishing boat.
  Conditions are in stark contrast to the gleaming sport fishing boat in Mexico.
  There's Doug, he's ready for action.
 Look.
  What's up?  ATTENBOROUGH: They are hoping to use a local fisherman's expertise  to put them in the right place at the right time.
  Yeah, roger that.
 Yeah, roger that.
  Oh, you catching today's food.
  You catching dinner, lunch and breakfast, you know.
  MAN: (OVER RADIO) Roger.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It's not a big boat  and the crew's bedroom has now become the kitchen.
  We're having fried bacon, fried egg this morning.
  Fried bacon, fried eggs.
  (LAUGHING)  I'm the trainee chef, so I don't get to wear the white wellies.
  (ALL LAUGHING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Rather than racing around the ocean chasing the action,  the flying fish team have to sit it out and wait for the fish to come to them.
  Flying fish will spawn onto debris in the water.
  And the team tie onto a floating palm frond  to try and make sure they're close by in case the action begins.
  And sure enough, they don't have long to wait.
  Thousands of fish have massed below the surface,  all intent on reaching the frond.
  And the frond is not the only thing  that they're trying to lay their eggs on.
  The weight of the eggs sinks the palm frond  and puts an end to the spawning and to the crew's filming.
  Well, it's moments like that we do the job for.
  Everything was right.
 The light was right, blue water,  the four tons of flying fish all going mental.
  - Thanks, Barry.
 - You're welcome.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But now the fishes' attention is turned to something bigger.
  They're spawning directly onto the boat.
  Barry is worried as he drags up a huge sheet of eggs.
  Want to bring it in the boat and check it out? I cleaned this off  like five minutes ago, right?  Right now the problem is that there are too many flying fish around us.
  If we go through the night with the lights on and stuff,  more and more and more will keep coming  and what they're doing here is they're actually laying on the boat now.
  So the boat has become their object and that is not good.
  So basically you're worried that if we just stay on this drift,  we're gonna sink the boat.
  Five hours from now, that will be 3,000 pounds, yeah,  in the back here, it will sink the boat.
  - Okay, so we're going to leave.
 - Yeah, we can't stay here.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Just five minutes of spawning has produced this.
  The team have no option but to move on.
  The next day, the search for flying fish begins all over again.
  This time the team want to film the fish doing what they're famous for.
  We've got some lovely shots of them spawning  but now the really hard bit of trying to get them flying.
  It's gonna be a good challenge.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The fish are around, but they're all too far off to film.
  The action is impressive this morning.
  Unpredictable but impressive, but it's distant.
  And it's not happening next to the boat today.
  They're either being chased off by something or they're just not inter  Look, look, look.
 It flies!  Ay-yi-yi!  ATTENBOROUGH: The next day, the crew decides  to try a different approach.
  Cool.
  All right, let's go.
  Now they're just where they need to be,  but it puts them directly in the firing line.
  (LAUGHING) I guess that's one.
  Despite being bombarded, their strategy is paying off.
  That was amazing.
 We spent a long time in that wee boat today.
 Thanks.
  The last two hours were just off the scale,  we were just getting shot after shot.
  We need Can't wait to watch on the big monitor, but that felt really good.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And Doug is right.
 It worked.
  Flying fish taking to the air and flying,  slowed down 40 times.
  By working with people more used to catching fish than filming them,  the Life team have been able to gain a unique insight  into the hidden world of fish.
 
                    (BIRDS CHIRPING)  ATTENBOROUGH: One hundred and fifty million years ago,  as dinosaurs approached their golden age,  one group evolved along new and revolutionary lines.
  Although they retained many of their reptilian characteristics,  they acquired extraordinary new ones.
  Feathers.
  Feathers helped with insulation and display.
  But they offered something far more valuable,  the power of flight.
  And for birds, that changed everything.
  Birds have the freedom of the skies  to travel further and faster than any other group of animals  and to seize opportunities in all corners of the planet.
  But this freedom brings many survival challenges,  which birds must tackle at pivotal moments in their lives.
  Flying demands enormous skill and effort.
  And nowhere is that more evident than here  in the foothills of the Peruvian Andes.
  This female hummingbird hovers with precision  in her quest for nectar.
  Her wing and tail design allow her to fly in any direction.
  But the male has a real problem flying.
  (CHIRPS)  And this is why.
  He's weighed down with two super-long tail feathers  tipped with cumbersome discs.
  This is the Marvellous Spatuletail hummingbird  and these are his flags, with which to seduce a mate.
  Waving them back and forth takes a lot of effort,  even from the comfort of his perch.
  But to win her heart, he's got to go up a gear.
  He must show her how well he can fly,  but it's exhausting work.
  It's so demanding,  he can only stay airborne for a matter of seconds  before he needs a rest.
  He's struggling to impress her, so one last try.
  The extreme effort and energy needed to hover  means hummingbirds can only fly in short, sharp bursts.
  But most birds need to stay airborne for considerably longer  and must find far more energy-efficient ways to get around.
  Here in the Simien Mountains of Ethiopia,  at a breathtaking altitude of 15,000 feet,  lives a supreme aerial maestro.
  The lammergeier.
  This youngster glides on air currents rising from the mountain slopes below.
  His nine-foot wingspan can carry him hundreds of miles a day  in search of animal carcasses with precious little effort.
  He watches out for other airborne scavengers  like these Griffon vultures.
  They lead him to some commotion on the cliffs  and maybe the chance to feed.
  But this youngster is not the only lammergeier to spot the opportunity.
  So too has this adult.
  (SCREECHING)  The vultures quickly strip the carcass clean.
  (SCREECHING)  It seems he's too late.
  But in fact, he's timed his arrival perfectly.
  (SQUAWKS)  There's no meat left.
  And that's exactly the moment that the lammergeier has been waiting for.
  It's bones he's after.
  The young lammergeier too homes in on the carcass.
  Bones contain rich marrow fat.
  But extracting it is not easy,  especially when the bone is a solid four kilos and too big to swallow.
  But lammergeiers have an extraordinary solution,  thanks to their flying skills.
  Soaring up on thermal air currents  and positioning the bone parallel to his body to minimise drag,  he soon reaches the perfect height.
  From here, he glides to a place he knows  where he can deal with the bone,  where there are giant rock slabs on the lip of an escarpment.
  The bone is smashed.
  The juices in his stomach  are more corrosive than battery acid.
  They dissolve the bone so that he can now digest the marrow.
  Others come looking for leftovers.
  But their timing isn't ideal  because now the young lammergeier has his turn.
  They'd better mind their heads.
  (BOTH SQUAWKING)  (CAWING)  Proficient bone smashing takes endless practice,  to find just the right height, speed and moment of release.
  Lammergeiers have long, broad wings,  ideal for gliding great distances with maximum efficiency.
  But on the island of Little Tobago in the Caribbean  lives a bird for whom aerial agility is of paramount importance.
  The red-billed tropicbird.
  Short, pointed wings give it great manoeuvrability and speed.
  During the breeding season,  these flying skills are tested to the limit.
  While one parent looks after the chick,  the other must journey far offshore  to gather small fish and squid from the surface waters.
  But the hardest part is getting food back to the island,  because they share this airspace with thieves.
  Magnificent frigatebirds,  known as man-of-war birds, patrol high above.
  These pirates are not trying to kill the tropicbird,  but force it to give up its catch.
  It's an aerial dogfight.
  Tropicbirds are quicker on the turn.
  Frigates have exceptionally lightweight bodies  and their extremely long wings give them great power.
  Success!  A favourite attack is from behind and at height.
  There goes the fish.
  Another victory.
  This tropicbird chick still awaits the return of its parent,  who has yet to run the gauntlet of the pirates.
  Keeping close to the waves is his best chance.
  Frigatebirds have so little oil in their feathers  they can't risk ditching.
  (SQUAWKING)  If he can just reach the cliffs, he'll be safe.
  He has made it, with his crop still full of fish.
  (CHIRPING)  Red-billed tropicbirds rely on extreme aerial agility  to overcome the many challenges of their life.
  For others, survival demands endurance.
  Every spring, red knots fly 10,000 miles  from their wintering grounds in Argentina  to their nesting sites in Canada.
  The only way they complete this marathon journey  is by making a crucial fuel stop  here in Delaware Bay, on the east coast of America.
  What is most extraordinary is that  as well as having to find their way to this one location,  they must also time their arrival to perfection.
  They have a rendezvous with prehistoric creatures emerging from the deep,  which have hardly changed in 250 million years.
  They come ashore in greatest numbers on the highest spring tides.
  Horseshoe crabs.
  The crabs are here to lay their eggs.
  That's what the knots are after.
  Most eggs are buried out of reach,  but some are accidentally dug up by other crabs.
  Most of the West Atlantic red knot population  join this feeding frenzy.
  In a matter of weeks,  the knots need to rebuild their fat reserves and double in weight.
  To achieve this, each knot must eat as many as 400,000 eggs,  a tall order, given the skill and effort needed to swallow just one.
  Head down, feeding nonstop, means it's hard to be alert to predators.
  A peregrine falcon.
  With egg-laying complete,  the horseshoe crabs now leave these shores,  while the knots gather every last egg they can find.
  It's time for the birds to move on.
  The knots still have a further 2,000 mile nonstop flight  to reach their breeding grounds in Canada.
  Flight gives birds many advantages.
  But there's a period in their lives  when they're forced back down to earth.
  The nesting season.
  This is the time when they are at most risk,  so they must find the safest possible location.
  Few go to greater extremes than lesser flamingos.
  They nest in the remotest corners of Africa's caustic Soda Lakes.
  Like their reptilian ancestors, birds lay waterproof eggs.
  Despite this, flamingos still protect theirs  on special mud-stacked nests,  as the lake is prone to flooding.
  It's also just a little cooler up here.
  Temperatures at ground level  can reach a blistering 50 degrees centigrade.
  Once a chick hatches,  it spends the first six days in the nest.
  This is when it's at its most vulnerable,  totally reliant on its parents.
  The caustic mud deters predators.
  But the adult flamingos can cope in this quagmire  because of their long, scaly legs.
  Any chick that slips from the nest, however,  is treading on very dangerous ground.
  This parent encourages her chick to climb back to safety.
  Raising chicks requires huge parental investment  in both time and labour, wherever you are.
  (WIND HOWLING)  Few places are tougher than the Antarctic.
  Chinstrap penguins.
  Every day, they travel up to 50 miles out at sea, hunting for krill.
  But the hard part is getting this food back to the colony,  because it sits on the ice-free rim at the top of this giant volcano,  Deception Island.
  For the returning fishing party, the first challenge is getting ashore.
  The beach is steep, with a powerful undertow.
  This female lands safely.
  But she now begins a long journey on foot.
  For a flightless bird,  getting to the top of the volcano means a gruelling climb,  especially when glaciers covered with muddy volcanic ash stand in your way.
  It's like a game of Snakes and Ladders.
  A combination of beak, wingtip and feet,  and she wins through.
  Now she joins penguin rush hour.
  Almost home.
  (ALL SQUAWKING)  She's reached the crater rim,  but her trials are still not over.
  She must now try and find her family  among more than 150,000 birds.
  Her hearing is so acute  she can identify the individual cry of her own chick in the din.
  She's made it and the family welcomes her return.
  The result of all this parental effort, a mouthful of krill.
  Now it's her partner's turn.
  A chick's demands are endless.
  Sometimes they can push parents to desperate lengths.
  But birds are masters of improvisation.
  Dassen Island off the coast of South Africa  is home to a nesting colony of great white pelicans.
  There are chicks of all ages, all with a hefty appetite.
  The parents have a formidable task.
  These pelicans are among the heaviest flying birds in the world,  weighing up to 10 kilos.
  A V-formation is the most energy-efficient means of flying.
  It significantly reduces drag for the bird behind.
  Pelicans normally fish along the coast,  but a shortage of food supplies has forced them to look elsewhere.
  Cape gannets plunge deep, hunting fish beyond the reach of the pelicans.
  But the pelicans aren't after fish.
  Their sights are set on a bigger catch.
  Malgas Island is the nesting ground for some 60,000 Cape gannets.
  Normally, one gannet parent goes off fishing  while the other looks after the chick.
  But declining fish stocks means  both parents are often away hunting at the same time,  leaving their chicks unguarded.
  Something which hasn't gone unnoticed by the pelicans.
  (CHICKS TWITTERING)  Only chicks with parents at their side or those too large to swallow  have a chance.
  Back at the pelican colony, the parents regurgitate  partially digested Gannet chicks for their brood.
  Although most sea bird colonies on the African Cape are in decline,  the population of white pelicans nesting on Dassen is growing.
  When birds come together to breed, and before they commit to one another,  they will often perform the most remarkable displays.
  One of the most enchanting happens here on the lakes of Oregon.
  Clark's grebes mate for life,  but the female must test her partner's continuing commitment  and she does this by inviting him to join her in a ritualised dance.
  To strengthen their bond, he offers her a gift.
  Now, with eyes only for one another,  the faithful pair reach the climax of their dance.
  Other birds don't form pairs.
  Instead, a male tries to mate with as many females as he can.
  Male sage grouse gather in the grasslands of Wyoming  to advertise their virility with a finery of feathers and proud posturing.
  Females are much drabber looking  but extremely choosy.
  They will only mate with the most impressive male  and they judge a male's worthiness by the sounds he makes.
  (PLOPPING)  Birds go to great lengths to impress their partners.
  In the forests of New Guinea,  they famously use colourful feathers and song to maximum effect.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  (RESONATING CALL)  (CAWING)  Birds of Paradise.
  But in the western part of the island, these flamboyant birds share the forests  with a rather unassuming looking character,  the Vogelkop bowerbird.
  He might lack the plumage,  but he's got an extraordinary repertoire of song.
  And he's a wonderful mimic.
  Those are pigeon wing beats.
  That's a modest tiger-parrot.
  And that, a sulphur-crested cockatoo.
  Even more surprising, he's an avid collector  with a very appreciative eye for colour.
  This male favours red and orange flowers.
  And he's very fond of fungus.
  Not everything he collects stays where it should.
  He puts these treasures on display  within and around a construction that has taken him years to build.
  A giant bower, woven around a central sapling,  carpeted with moss.
  This grand design is no nest, it's the ultimate seduction parlour.
  But he's not alone on this hillside.
  He's got six rivals within earshot.
  This one prefers darker colours, decorating his bower with deer dung  and charcoal.
  Visual effect is of crucial importance.
  Clearly he hadn't planned on all this sprouting fungus.
  He and his nearest rival live a stone's throw apart.
  Competition is intense.
  It's the dung ball bower  that is the first to catch the female's attention.
  He withdraws while she inspects his workmanship.
  She's back again and seems impressed.
  But on closer inspection, she's less convinced.
  Perhaps it was that sprouting fungus.
  Back at the flower bower, the male performs a dress rehearsal.
  He senses she's watching.
  This is the moment he's been working towards.
  His bower channels his song in her direction.
  A final check.
  All is to her liking.
  Few birds devote such craft, effort, and ingenuity  to achieve this life-defining moment.
  But here on Kenya's Lake Bogoria, these massive pink slicks  signal the start of perhaps the grandest courtship event in nature.
  In certain years, when the lake is at its richest,  more than a million lesser flamingos congregate to feed.
  It's now, when they're in their prime,  that they must find their preferred partner.
  To do that, they perform a remarkable promenade.
  With heads held high and neck feathers ruffled,  making them look as pink as possible,  more and more birds join in the courtship march  and pairs begin to bond.
  Small groups merge with larger ones  until almost a thousand flamingos are on the move.
  From the equator to the poles,  birds have found the most ingenious ways  of overcoming the many challenges of life.
  And everything revolves around their unique attribute, feathers.
  For the past three years, the Life team has filmed birds  in every part of the world imaginable.
  Nowhere was the filming trickier than in the jungles of West Papua.
  Here is found, for me,  one of the greatest wonders of the bird world,  the display arena of the Vogelkop bowerbird.
  Thirteen years ago,  I was lucky enough to witness these spectacular builders.
  But filming the timid female and courtship behaviour  was a different matter.
  And this was what the Life team set out to film.
  Barrie Britton was the principle cameraman for this programme.
  With over 20 years in the business,  not only is he an accomplished photographer,  but he has developed a deep understanding of  and empathy for his subjects.
  Although each one posed its own unique challenges,  Barrie did seem to spend an inordinate amount of time  cooped up in his trusty old hide.
  I think I may have misjudged the hide position,  'cause the sea is coming in the bottom of the hide.
  Wow, well, that was 11hours in my little box.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Barrie saved his most ambitious trip of the series  until last.
  It took a team of 40 people  three days of tough uphill trekking to get to the filming camp.
  I could complain about leeches, biting insects,  the tough going  but I really don't want to, this is great.
  I seem to have lost everyone else.
 I hope I'm going the right way.
  Ah, made it.
  (SIGHS)  BRITTON: I'm completely shattered.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The hard work had only just begun.
  (GRUNTING)  Tomorrow, with the help of their guides,  the crew would go looking for the best bowers to film.
  But not before a cautionary tale from the local chief.
  (SPEAKING TRIBAL LANGUAGE)  So when he first was shown the bower by his father, he  There were flowers there  and as a 12-year-old child, he wanted to grab them,  but his father immediately stopped him  and said that he could not touch anything  or take anything away from the bower  because otherwise it would start raining very heavily.
  (ALARM BEEPING)  (GROANING)  - LYLE: It's 10 to five, Barrie.
 - Yeah.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With the chief's warning fresh in their minds,  Barrie and the team make an early start and head for the hide.
  Well, we've reached the hide just at sunrise,  so we're just going to get set up as quickly as we can.
  With knowledgeable guides, finding the bowers wasn't the problem.
  And who could miss such obvious structures?  It was now a waiting game for Barrie,  heavily concealed in his camouflaged hide.
  BRITTON: (SOFTLY) Okay, so, 6:30.
  So I'm just waiting now for the bird to come,  hoping that he doesn't suspect that anything is here  and that we can get some natural behaviour.
  (RESONATING BIRDCALLS)  I've just heard the bowerbird call just at the right of the hide.
  I can hear the bird outside.
  It's plucking on the fabric of the hide.
  I've just noticed that the bird has pulled a Snickers wrapper  out of the bottom of the hide and has added it to its display.
  BRITTON: It was a very strange decoration,  which I had to remove at the end of the day.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Had Barrie tempted fate by removing the wrapper  and ignoring the chief's warning?  Or was this just rainforest living up to its name?  When it pours like this, filming becomes virtually impossible.
  Soon the weather improved  and Barrie returned once more to the hide.
  This time his lunch box was firmly sealed.
  The bird is very keen on these little tiny metallic ladybirds  and they're a bit put out being put there in this bower,  so they start crawling off.
  They're very slowly making their way over the moss  and they just about get to the edge of the display  and then the bowerbird notices and goes and collects them  and puts them back again.
 So they're kind of  in this endless cycle of trying to escape from the bower.
  They just They can never quite get away.
  ATTENBOROUGH: However, for the male bowerbird, and Barrie,  the female was still proving a problem.
  The female did come down,  but she was quite nervous near the entrance to the bower  so we didn't get very much of that.
  This was a real concern,  because the courtship behaviour was key to our story.
  He's just done a 10-hour stint.
  It's been a really nice day so we're just hoping it's gone well.
  (GROANS)  ATTENBOROUGH: Another day's filming over and still little to show for it.
  LYLE: Ten hours in the hide.
  Fortunately, filming is over for the day.
  We're just going to go and collect Barrie again.
  - LYLE: Did you see a mate today? - No, no.
 No mating.
  (LAUGHING)  Everything else is going well but we haven't got the mating.
  The fact I was getting such good footage of the male  meant he'd obviously got used to the hide.
  But the visiting females were still wary of it.
  The females did seem a bit nervous.
  So I took the decision to push the hide back,  just to get more distance from the birds.
  The other thing I've done is recess the lens  and we put this vegetation all around it,  so I'm hoping that's going to provide more female behaviour.
  ATTENBOROUGH: There were few filming days left.
  It was crucial Barrie's adjustments paid off.
  (CHIRPING)  The male has just run into the bower and started calling,  so I think that means there might be a female coming.
  It struck me, here we both were, waiting in the darkness,  the male trying to attract the female,  and I was just hoping that I've got it right this time,  and it was more than just a fleeting visit.
  Working in a hide involves hours of prolonged inactivity  punctuated by the most intense moments of action.
  This was the crucial moment the whole team had worked towards.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Everything was falling into place for Barrie,  the behaviour unfolding.
  Right, that's good, I think we're in action.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Twenty-one days in a hide.
  Astonishing patience and perseverance.
  This has never been filmed before.
  Such effort and endeavour  for a crucial piece of behaviour that's over in a matter of seconds.
  Would you like to shake my hand, Stephen?  - What does that mean? - Ah, we got the mating.
  - You got the mating? - Yeah, yeah, we got the mating.
  (LAUGHING)  - Oh, wow! - Yeah, it's a really good day,  brilliant day, yeah.
 But just amazing.
 I must have  Well, what is it, three weeks  - I've spent sitting in this hide.
 - Wow.
 Yeah.
  And I just didn't think we'd ever get it.
 I just  'Cause we're running out of days, only a few left now, so  so to get that this week is just incredible.
  And it was really, really good, really good behaviour.
  So I'm delighted.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Success.
  This was Barrie's last filming trip for the Birds episode,  and what a befitting end.
 
                    (BIRDS CHIRPING)  ATTENBOROUGH: There are more kinds of insects in the world  than all other kinds of animals put together.
  But because they are so small,  we rarely see how extraordinary they are.
  Occasionally they assemble in astonishing numbers.
  A billion monarch butterflies hibernate in the forests of Mexico.
  Vast clouds of mayflies emerge all at once to mate.
  Insects face endless challenges.
  They can transform their bodies to meet every purpose.
  Eyes grow on stalks, bodies become chemical guns.
  To discover how and why they do such things,  you have to enter their world.
  Patagonia, Chile.
  Home to one of the most extraordinary of beetles.
  There are many kinds of beetles in the world,  but this one has some of the biggest jaws of all.
  He is Darwin's beetle.
  He's on his way to the forest to look for a mate.
  Whether he gets one or not  will depend on his strength and on the size of his jaws.
  He starts his search.
  A female is likely to be on a tree trunk.
  But trees in this part of the world are very tall.
  His search could be a long one.
  Unfortunately for him, she is 25 metres above him, near the top.
  She has more normal-sized jaws.
  But then, she only needs them for feeding.
  But he needs immense jaws for fighting.
  Because there are other males around with the same mission.
  Sheer strength is not enough in these battles.
  The technique is to reach over your opponent's head  and hook your jaws under his wing covers.
  That's why his jaws are so long and have that odd shape.
  He's got the grip, now he has to lift.
  And that needs strength.
  Another lift is needed.
  And that's that.
  Beetle armour is strong, so he bounces.
  The winner climbs on.
  There are more males ready to fight him up here.
  And here she is at last.
  But she doesn't seem to be in the mood.
  So now he has to use his great jaws as a restraining cage.
  Success at last.
  But the hurling habit dies hard.
  Insects' bodies have the capacity  to take on an almost infinite variety of shapes.
  This is one of the keys to their success.
  This male moth doesn't go in search of females.
  He inflates a pair of scented plumes  that protrude from the end of his abdomen  and they come to him.
  All insects have the same basic design,  six legs and an armour-covered body.
  But the different parts can become exaggerated  to solve particular problems.
  This beetle has a giraffe's neck in order to fight.
  A praying mantis is disguised as a flower and waits in ambush.
  Another is almost invisible among dead leaves.
  Insect armour can carry colours that can camouflage or communicate.
  But the armour can also be converted into wings.
  And that makes insects a global force,  enabling them to invade almost every habitat on Earth.
  In southern France,  one insect is starting on the most important day of its life.
  Dawn,  and a newly-hatched damselfly.
  She needs to mate and lay her eggs before sunset.
  Her adult life is so short, she may not get another chance.
  Her success will depend on these fragile wings.
  She faces many perils.
  Few insects can escape from a spider's web.
  But her wings are more powerful than they look.
  She wants to mate with the strongest male.
  However, the stream where she might find him is a battleground.
  She watches while dark-winged males compete for the best territories,  thrashing their wings at each other in threat  or trying to force their opponents into the water.
  Fighting finished,  the female uses her wings to signal her presence to the winner.
  She won't be rushed,  but if he doesn't grip her with his tail, a rival might steal her.
  As they mate, their linked bodies form the shape of a heart.
  But now, she has the problem of laying her fertilised eggs  and that brings new hassles.
  Like any athlete, she must warm her muscles for optimum performance  and does so by using her wings as solar-heating panels.
  She must fly dangerously low if she is to find the right place for her eggs.
  Only the quickest damselflies escape.
  Safely past the frogs,  this female has reached a suitable plant on which to lay her eggs.
  But she has to place them underwater if they are to survive.
  For the first time, her wings seem to be a hindrance  but, in fact, they help her yet again  by trapping a silvery layer of air which enables her to breathe.
  She cuts into a plant stem and deposits her eggs inside.
  Now her wings are going to be truly tested.
  If she can't break through the water surface, she will drown.
  Her day has been a complete success.
  Damselflies seldom venture beyond their home stream.
  But some insects fly huge distances.
  September, on the shores of Lake Erie, in southern Canada.
  A monarch butterfly is fuelling up on nectar.
  A chill gust of northerly air.
  It's time to leave.
  The coming winter will be so cold it would kill her.
  She has never flown more than a few hundred metres in her life.
  But now she is heading out over Lake Erie,  which is a hundred miles across.
  This is just the first leg of one of the world's greatest animal migrations.
  She will continue south, using the sun as a compass to cross America,  a journey of 2,000 miles.
  Her destination is Mexico  and one small and special group of trees.
  No one knows how she finds them in these great mountain forests.
  She joins other monarch butterflies  that have travelled here from all over North America.
  Countless butterflies crowd these particular trees,  hanging from every branch.
  They come here because although winter brings a chill to the air,  there will not be a lethal freeze as there will in Canada.
  The conditions are perfect for hibernation.
  Hibernating butterflies are vulnerable to predators.
  But monarchs are poisonous.
  However, a few birds have learned to rip out the toxic parts and eat the rest.
  They kill hundreds of thousands of butterflies and dislodge many more.
  Those that fall  must get back into the trees before nightfall brings another killer.
  They vibrate their wings to warm their flight muscles,  but it's a race against time.
  Night brings a lethal ground frost.
  Those that do survive  sleep safely huddled together in the trees for four months.
  The warmth of spring wakes them from their hibernation.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  (RUSTLING)  The majority of the butterflies that flew here from Canada have survived.
  They take their first drink since their arrival last autumn.
  With increasing warmth, more and more butterflies awake.
  Soon they will all disperse northwards  and tranquillity will return to this forest,  until the great-grandchildren of these butterflies return  to escape the freezing northern winter.
  Some insects, however,  have made a speciality of living in the most adverse conditions.
  Mono Lake is known as California's Dead Sea.
  It's twice as salty as the ocean and lethal to almost all life.
  (INSECTS BUZZING)  Alkali flies are one of the few creatures  able to tolerate these conditions.
  And since they have virtually no competitors,  they swarm in their millions.
  Flies are one of the most successful of all insects.
  There are 85,000 different kinds  and among them, a perfect fly for almost every habitat,  even this one.
  (LOUD BUZZING)  The alkali fly has special abilities that enable it to live on this lake.
  It can walk underwater to eat algae.
  Fine hairs trap air bubbles that prevent it from drowning.
  But most critically,  the fly has a physiology that can neutralise the lethal levels of salt.
  So the Alkali fly's dominance of Mono Lake goes unchallenged,  except for a few weeks of the year.
  A hundred thousand Wilson's Phalarope are migrating to South America.
  Mono Lake is their only stopover.
  These alkali flies, for them,  are an invaluable and irresistible feast.
  A fly has no defence except to fly and become lost in a vast swarm.
  It needs considerable skill to pluck an individual fly from the air.
  There are gulls here, too.
  Though their fly-catching techniques are not so refined.
  In four weeks, the phalaropes double their weight.
  Then they set off again, heading south, leaving the gulls behind.
  The size of the fly population has scarcely been affected.
  For them, sheer abundance is defence enough.
  (FLIES BUZZING)  But for some insects, defence is a much more complicated affair.
  A oogpister beetle in South Africa.
  He hunts ants.
  Eating ants may give him more than just nourishment.
  He may get something else from them that helps him fight his enemies.
  The ants launch a counter attack and nip his ankles.
  But he simply kicks them out of the way.
  The valiant ants drive him off, straight into real danger.
  A mongoose.
  It's inquisitive.
  But it's also wary of the oogpister.
  A black and white pattern is a warning signal.
  The beetle takes aim  and fires formic acid straight at the mongoose's eyes and mouth.
  The beetle probably collected this acid from the ants.
  It certainly makes the beetle itself very distasteful.
  And that, in turn, makes it worth mimicking.
  This defenceless little lizard carries the beetle's warning pattern.
  It also imitates the way the beetle runs.
  Not particularly well, it's true, but well enough  to fool predators into thinking it just might be an acid-firing beetle.
  All kinds of insects have developed chemical weapons.
  A pair of devil rider stick insects.
  They fire bitter-tasting oils, turpines.
  European wood ants under attack from a hungry crow.
  They fire the sort of acid that gives nettles their sting.
  So, this is like one of us falling into a nettle patch.
  But the master of chemical warfare is the bombardier beetle.
  It can create a chemical reaction within its body so violent  that boiling caustic liquid explodes out of its abdomen.
  By pulsing the jet 500 times a second,  it keeps its rear end just cool enough to prevent it being cooked.
  In the woodlands of Minnesota,  there is an insect that has another chemical weapon.
  But this one fights as an army, and can stand up to almost any predator.
  (BIRDS CALLING)  Bees collect nectar all day  and transform it within their stomachs into one of nature's richest foods,  honey.
  Hundreds of them are bringing their precious loads  back to their colony in this hollow log.
  The honey in their combs provides food for their young,  and for the whole colony if the weather turns cold or there's a drought.
  But so much food attracts thieves.
  A black bear cub has a sweet tooth.
  But he's never come across bees before,  and he doesn't know that they will defend their honey to the death.
  Stinging is the ultimate self-sacrifice for a bee,  because it can't pull out its barbed sting  (BEAR GRUNTING)  so its body is torn apart.
  (GRUNTING)  The bees' attack was far too much for the cub.
  But a greater challenge is coming  (CRASHING)  the cub's mother.
  The bees fight so hard that she only has time to steal a single comb.
  While the family enjoy their honey at a safe distance,  the bees appear to have been defeated.
  Their home has been destroyed,  and their young will inevitably die out in the open.
  Yet the colony is not doomed,  because the workers are now rescuing at least some of what really matters,  their honey.
  Each survivor is able to eat its own weight in honey,  storing it in its stomach.
  They will have to abandon their dying young,  but they will take much of their precious honey with them  to sustain themselves while they build a new colony.
  Working together in such an organised society  is the insects' great innovation.
  So how did it begin?  It may have started in a place like this,  the nest of the Japanese red bug.
  Parent insects don't usually care for their offspring,  but this bug is different.
  The young feed on fallen fruit from just one kind of rare tree.
  They could never find it by themselves, so their mother collects it for them.
  She probes every fruit she finds to test its ripeness,  and rejects one after another.
  This can take hours.
  At last, a perfect fruit.
  A thief! It's easier to steal than find fruit for yourself.
  For both bugs, the outcome of this dispute  will be life-changing.
  As the mother struggles to keep her prize,  her young, back in the nest, are growing restless.
  The thief has won.
  The mother doesn't know that her hungry young are leaving their nest  in search of a better provider.
  She returns to find that her nest is empty.
  Her young find the nest of the thief, who is herself a mother.
  She returns to find that she has twice as many mouths to feed.
  The loser has failed at her only chance of parenthood.
  For the thief, life has suddenly got much harder.
  A fruit won't now last as long as it did.
  The young clamber over her, demanding more.
  She returns with another fruit,  but her enlarged and insatiable brood want still more.
  So she has to work nonstop, day after day.
  At last, the young become big enough to fend for themselves.
  But their success has come at a cost.
  The mother has worked herself to death.
  And now, her body has become their last meal  before they leave home.
  Looking after the young in such a way  is thought to be the first step towards living in a community.
  But, some insects benefit from doing the opposite of collaborating.
  They kill one another.
  Dawson's bee is one of the largest in the world.
  It nests in the baked soil of the Australian Outback.
  Flowers are rare in this desert, so colonies of these bees  are few and far between.
  The bees excavate tunnels for their young.
  The community is so harmonious that it's hard to believe  that this place is also the setting for mass murder.
  Tempers do flare when a bee gets confused  and goes down another's burrow,  but these are minor disagreements.
  The colony is peaceful at the moment,  because every bee here is a female.
  It's the males that are the killers and they are all dead.
  Their story began two months earlier, before the appearance of the females.
  Male Dawson's bees.
  The females are only just emerging,  burrowing their way, one by one, out of the tunnels where they hatched  and grew up.
 And their scent inflames the males.
  They are huge and built for fighting.
  And each one wants to be in the best position to mate with a female.
  A female emerges and immediately there's a brawl  as every male tries to reach her.
  It's very rare for animals to kill their own kind in combat.
  But stinging and biting rivals to death is usually the only way  these male bees get a female.
  A winner manages to claim a female and the pair race for cover.
  Meanwhile, the female's lingering scent drives one unsuccessful male  into a deadly frenzy.
  Another female caught in the middle of another brawl  becomes an accidental casualty.
  By the time the last female has emerged, every male is dead.
  The battles have ensured that the strongest males will have mated  with the most females.
  Two months later and it's an all-female world,  with the next generation already developing underground.
  Insects have evolved sophisticated societies that in complexity  are the closest thing in nature to our own cities.
  The insects that built this structure in Argentina  dominate the surrounding grasslands  thanks to skills that seem almost more human than insect.
  It's a metropolis, a home to millions of ants.
  The colony needs a huge supply of food.
  It's surrounded by grass.
  But the ants themselves can't digest a blade of it.
  Nonetheless, they collect it.
  Although they're all the same species,  they exist in different shapes and sizes.
  The heads of these big-jawed individuals  are not full of brain but brawn.
  They give the species its name, they are grass cutters.
  They work all day, every day.
  The small ants, down on the ground, are porters,  with the job of carrying the grass segments back to the colony.
  They have great strength.
  Their main problem is balance.
  Columns of them carry the grass back to the nest,  along highways as straight as Roman roads.
  Different members of the colony specialise in particular tasks,  in much the same way as people do.
  But, as in human society, there can be problems.
  A hitchhiker makes one ant's job much harder.
  And this isn't even grass.
  A single colony harvests half a ton of grass a year,  more than any other animal on these plains.
  But since they themselves can't eat it, why do they do so?  The answer lies underground.
  They have one of the most extraordinary survival strategies  in the insect world.
  The ants have dug a network of tunnels that extend downwards  for over seven metres.
  At the heart of the colony lies the key to their survival, a fungus.
  But this isn't sloppy housekeeping,  this is a fungus that is found nowhere else on Earth.
  And the ants cultivate it assiduously.
  The big-jawed ants chop up the grass, covering it with an antibiotic saliva  that kills every kind of fungus except this one.
  The ants are farmers.
  They feed the grass to the fungus and the fungus thrives.
  The ants cultivate dozens of these fungus gardens throughout the colony.
  This is what they eat.
  The system is so efficient  that a single colony can have five million members.
  But the fungus is also dangerous.
  As it grows, it releases carbon dioxide that could asphyxiate the entire colony.
  The ants' way of dealing with this danger is ingenious.
  They construct their nest  so that it has an automatic air-conditioning system.
  The outer surface is so shaped that the slightest breeze  sucks out stale air through these central vents.
  At the same time, fresh air is drawn down  through the outer vents, right into the heart of the nest.
  Our own societies have existed for thousands of years,  but insect societies have lasted for millions.
  There may be 10 million different kinds of insects.
  And there are 200 million individuals for every one of us.
  The insects' flexible armour and their adaptability  has made them the most abundant and the most diverse animal group  in our planet's history.
  The Sierra Madre Mountains in Mexico  are home to one of the greatest natural wonders.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  A billion bright orange butterflies  offered the Life team a wonderful filming challenge.
  The colonies are only found above 3,000 metres  and the team trek there slowly in the thin air.
  The monarch phenomenon was only discovered here around 30 years ago  and one man has been studying them every year since,  Professor Lincoln Brower.
  His knowledge will be essential if the team are to achieve their goal  of flying a camera among the butterflies.
  It's amazing that the butterflies only come to this area  that's about 30 by 60 miles in extent.
  There are other areas that have high forests  in different parts of Mexico,  to the west of here, to the south of here.
  But as far as we know, this is the only place that monarchs  are able to spend the winter.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The butterflies are in such numbers  that filming them the traditional way, from a camera on a tripod,  is reasonably straightforward.
  But to get a butterfly's viewpoint by flying a camera amongst the swarms  is going to be altogether more difficult.
  First, the team need a spot where butterflies gather in huge numbers.
  Luckily, Lincoln knows a place where thousands come down to drink every day.
  The crew spend the next three days preparing the equipment.
  A remote-controlled camera, a lot of cable, two bicycle wheels,  a bag of rocks and some muscle power.
  (MAN GRUNTING)  Now all they need to do is wait until the butterfly numbers  reach truly impressive proportions.
  By midday, the butterflies are swarming  and it's time for the camera to glide with them through the air.
  Three and away.
  This looks superb.
  - Okay, let's just stop that.
 - Perfect.
 Absolutely stunning.
  We've got great numbers coming in, so let's keep going.
  - And then we'll do a turn-round.
 - Sure.
  ATTENBOROUGH: A series of unique shots, flying with the butterflies.
  But that was the easy part.
  Now it's time to get the camera 50 metres up into the treetops.
  Filming the roosting butterflies is not going to be simple.
  The clusters are unstable.
  There just aren't as many butterflies.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And they can suddenly disperse without warning,  what Lincoln calls an "explosion".
  Here's another explosion.
 Wow, look at that.
  And they're going right over our heads.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Spectacular, no doubt,  but a real problem for the climbing team,  Jim Spickler and Tim Fogg.
  Would it be better for us to start now? We're going to be very careful  not to disturb them, or limit our disturbance.
  But if we do disturb them  Right now, it seems that they're warm enough that they could relocate  to a cluster right adjacent to them.
 Do you think that's true? Or  Well, if you disturb them, they tend to fly away from the tree,  50 feet or so.
  So, you'll lose those clusters, I think, if you disturb them.
  FOGG: Do you think they'll cluster again?  - BROWER: No.
 - No? Tomorrow night?  - I doubt it.
 - Wouldn't they?  - BROWER: I think they'll just move down.
 - Oh, yeah.
  That's really hard stuff, you know.
  Because I can't see how we can get up the trees  and do what we have to up there,  close to any clusters, without them flying.
  I just don't know how I'm going to be able to get an arrow into the tree.
  I think if you picked your tree, you could put the arrow in it now.
  (FLUTTERING)  ATTENBOROUGH: The prospect of rigging cables high in the canopy  without disturbing the butterflies is a daunting one.
  They may only get one chance.
  One false move and it'll all be gone.
  And I sort of had the impression that they might come back again,  but Lincoln says they just won't.
 They'll just move on to another tree.
  So, we'll put all the rigging in, disturb them and then  (LAUGHING) That's it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Choosing which trees to rig is a critical decision.
  Can you get right to tree number six, do you think, or is that too far?  ATTENBOROUGH: They begin by firing a line over a suitably high branch.
  (ARROW WHIRRING)  That'll work.
  Nobody, not even Lincoln, knows how the butterflies will react.
  SPICKLER: Yeah, that's going to work perfect, I think.
  Okay, great.
  I've got to do a changeover here, so just give me a moment.
  (GRUNTS)  There's an explo Explosion!  Thankfully, it's not in the trees  that Jim and Tim are rigging with such care.
  I've got it too much.
 Can you just push it towards me a bit?  (GROANS)  - FOGG: You okay? - Yeah.
  FOGG: Okay, get your fingers out.
 Okay, that's good.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It takes another three days to get the aerial rig set up,  followed by many hours of fine tuning.
  A bit dodgy.
  SPICKLER: Can you just pan it so we don't see it in the monitor, please?  Everything is finally set, and the butterflies are still there.
  FOGG: One, two, three.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Take one.
  (GROANING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Too slow.
  There was no load at the beginning and suddenly it just completely stopped.
  SPICKLER: Yeah.
  Two, three.
  (CREAKING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Take six.
  Start to slow now and keep going.
  Start to slow.
 Slow and keep going.
 Keep going, keep going.
  Okay, Mike, hold it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Not far enough.
  We've not got enough weight here and  ATTENBOROUGH: Take nine.
  Go on, Mike.
 Go on, Mike.
  - Getting close, Mike, now start slowing.
 - Okay.
 Slow.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It's still not right, and now time is running out.
  I think the light's going.
 These  FOGG: Should we do one last take?  All right, 'cause these ones here, they're losing the light on them.
  Let me try and get a shot that's going fast here, if it's smooth.
  FOGG: One, two, three and we're away.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Take 17.
  And it's looking good.
  FOGG: Okay, start slowing, Mike.
  Okay, keep it going, keep it going.
  - Ah! - Can't see it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Success at last.
  With the technique now working, the crew rig more and more shots  to give an aerial perspective on the monarch phenomenon.
  His work advising the crew over,  Lincoln continues the observations he's been making  for over a quarter of a century.
  Although the butterflies are still here in immense numbers,  he's worried there is a threat to their survival.
  The big, huge influx maybe sometimes as many as two billion butterflies  flying down into this tiny area of 30 by 60 miles,  is thoroughly endangered by illegal logging.
  If the forest is not protected, the phenomenon will be lost.
  That'd be a disaster.
  I mean, it would be like taking the Mona Lisa  out of the Parisian museum and burning it up.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: Life is at its most intense  during the struggles between predator and prey.
  (BIRDS SQUAWKING)  Each side, to survive,  must outwit and outmanoeuvre the other.
  The prize for the hunter, a meal.
  For the prey, the chance to live another day.
  Three male cheetahs.
  These brothers are very special.
  They hunt prey few other cheetahs would dare to tackle.
  To succeed, they must first select a victim,  and then work together to overpower it.
  (ZEBRAS BRAYING)  It's dangerous work.
  (ZEBRAS SNORTING)  An adult zebra is potentially lethal.
  The outcome is by no means certain.
  The first cheetah is driven off.
  And his brothers have already made a critical mistake.
  They were not close enough to take over the attack.
  Each is chasing a different target,  making it easy for the zebra to defend their young.
  (CHEETAH GROWLING)  (ZEBRA BRAYING)  A quarter-ton stallion finally puts paid their chances.
  Chasing different zebra was bound to lead to failure.
  Perhaps their enthusiasm got the better of them.
  They must try again.
  (PANTING)  In the shadow of Mount Kenya, the brothers regroup.
  Their mistake with the zebra  was to hunt as ordinary as cheetahs do, as individuals.
  To catch such prey, they must hunt like no other cheetahs.
  That means acting together, as one.
  They start again.
  An ostrich outweighs and outguns a single cheetah.
  This time there's only one target.
  And all three cheetahs are onto it.
  (OSTRICH SHRIEKING)  (THUDDING)  The third brother starts to throttle the ostrich.
  Even off its feet, it's still dangerous.
  The brothers have found a unique way of catching their prey.
  (CHEETAH GROWLING SOFTLY)  The ability to invent such novel hunting tactics  is one thing that really sets mammals apart.
  But mammals themselves can also be targets for predators,  and the hunted also need to devise special tactics.
  The desert shores of the Dead Sea.
  Living here is difficult indeed.
  It's March.
  And high on these cathedral cliffs,  ibex have given birth.
  For the first few days, the kids were kept safe,  isolated on the clifftops.
  But now the ibex have a problem.
  The only food and water is far below, at the bottom of the gorge,  and that is where predators lurk.
  If they are to feed, it's a risk they will have to take.
  The adults lead the way.
  They know the safest routes,  though "safe" here is a relative term.
  The kids have no choice but to keep up.
  One slip could be the last.
  Their only assets are cloven hooves that spread under load,  astonishing balance  and the most uncanny agility.
  Barely a week old, they are utterly fearless.
  Learning to negotiate these cliffs is central to their survival.
  But now the family must be on guard against predators.
  Or grab a chance to browse.
  Trailing behind, the last youngster is almost down.
  And runs right into trouble.
  A fox.
  It's been waiting for a straggler.
  The kid has never seen a fox before, but knows it's in real peril.
  It appears to be running into more trouble as it heads back up the cliff.
  The fox tries to gain the higher ground.
  But the kid has found safety on a face so steep  that only an ibex could stand there.
  The lessons learnt on this morning's descent has saved its life.
  Finally, the fox gives it up as a bad job,  perhaps suddenly aware it's standing on a precipice.
  Despite its tender age, the ibex has outwitted  one of the canniest of predators.
  The fox's failure epitomises a predator's plight.
  Most hunts fail,  so hunters are continually devising new tactics.
  The rainforests of Belize in Central America.
  And as evening falls and the shower comes to an end,  a predator begins to hunt.
  The greater bulldog bat.
  A flying mammal  and a fisherman.
  A fish swimming just below the surface creates telltale ripples.
  And that is all a bat needs to detect them.
  With a little more than a fin to aim for,  and whilst flying at 40 miles an hour,  the bat takes the fish completely unawares.
  If the shoal scatters,  the bat trawls the surface,  raking the water, trying to snag a fish.
  He won't have the best fishing spot to himself for long  and soon, other bats arrive.
  Oncoming traffic would make grabbing a fish almost impossible.
  So the bats avoid collisions by honking,  dropping their calls an octave, to say, "Look out! Here I come!"  Soon, the shoal has either been captured or has fled  and the bats move on.
  Skills like this take practice.
  And for some mammals, that practice begins in infancy.
  A young stoat.
  And it's not alone.
  These wild games are too much to resist.
  (STOATS SQUEAKING)  Stalking, chasing and ambushing, all practised in play.
  Soon, the young stoats must hunt for themselves,  and then these athletic skills will be crucial.
  (SHEEP BLEATING)  It's September in the English countryside.
  This stoat is about to take on an adversary 10 times its size.
  It's too dangerous to rush straight in.
  Instead, the stoat's aim is to wear the rabbit down.
  The rabbit is flagging and the stoat's stamina  is starting to make a difference.
  But stamina alone is not enough.
 The rabbit must still be overpowered.
  (SQUEALING)  A bite to the back of the neck, and a kill.
  The incredible agility of the stoat, practised since it was a kit,  was just enough to swing the balance.
  There are times when mere physical powers are not enough  to give the hunter an edge.
  Then, mammals must deploy their most sophisticated weapon, their brains.
  Strange patterns are visible in the mud of Florida Bay,  a faint hint of a unique hunting tactic.
  The perpetrators,  bottlenose dolphins.
  And they're on a mission, a mission to catch fish.
  The fish here are very difficult to catch,  and in such shallow water they ought to be safe.
  Yet the dolphins have a plan.
  They have learnt to corral the fish by working as a team.
  (DOLPHINS CLICKING)  The lead dolphin beats its tail on the sea bed,  stirring up a ring of mud.
  Trapped inside, the fish take their only way out.
  But they're leaping out of the frying pan and into the fire.
  Once the mud ring loses its shape, the fish scatter.
  The dolphins move on and repeat the process.
  Brain power combined with teamwork, it's a winning formula.
  This behaviour is unique to the dolphins of Florida Bay.
  Successive generations have learnt it from their parents  and in turn, they will teach it to their own young.
  The ability to pass on such complex behaviours  is one of the mammals' greatest talents.
  It enables them to survive where others would perish.
  As winter approaches in Alaska,  food gets progressively harder to find.
  To live here is to walk a tightrope.
  Yet every year, this coast attracts North America's most impressive hunter.
  (WAVES CRASHING)  A brown bear.
  Here, they grow larger than anywhere in the world.
  Other bears have also gathered at the edge of the surf.
  They've come here to fatten up for the winter.
  They're waiting for an event that happens just once a year,  the salmon run.
  Others will tackle the fish upriver but here in the sea,  these bears have the first chance.
  Each bear's survival depends on this run of fish staying strong.
  There are years when their gamble fails and the fish hardly show.
  Then the bears face starvation.
  This year promises to be a bumper one  and the bears will be able to pile on the pounds ahead of winter.
  Mammals are supreme in their ability to exploit such fleeting opportunities.
  (SEAGULLS SQUAWKING)  (BEARS GROWLING)  Chances come and go with the passing of the seasons.
  But for some predators, conditions are tough whatever the time of year.
  At first glance, these mountains seem barren and empty of life.
  Like islands thrust up into the sky,  they tower above the surrounding plains.
  Yet far from being deserted, they are a refuge.
  Isolated here, on the roof of Africa,  is one of the rarest hunters in the world,  the Ethiopian wolf,  the only wolf in the whole of Africa.
  (WOLVES HOWLING)  (BARKING)  (GROWLING)  Despite being close to the equator, these peaks are so cold at night  that the wolves face a frost-covered dawn.
  (PUPS WHINING)  Each pack is centred around a single dominant female.
  Normally, it is only she who breeds.
  This year, she has produced six pups.
  But if she is to raise them all in this barren land,  she will need the help of the entire pack.
  Every morning the pack sets off to hunt,  leaving her back among the rocks with the pups.
  The pack's hunting ground is about five square miles of mountaintop.
  They guard it seriously,  patrolling its frontiers every day.
  Wolves elsewhere collaborate and use their united power  to pull down big prey.
  But there are no caribou or moose to be found up here.
  The pack splits up.
  Each member is going to hunt alone.
  One of them spots something.
  It's a rat.
  But catching rats is not easy, no matter how carefully you stalk them.
  Another hunter has a more proactive technique.
  (RAT SQUEAKING)  And that works.
  It's a lot of work for a relatively small reward  and demands its own particular style of hunting.
  (PUPS WHIMPERING)  A hunter returns.
  Mother demands food and the successful hunter delivers it.
  So rearing a single litter here  takes the combined labour of a dozen or so adults  and the Ethiopian wolves have adjusted their behaviour accordingly.
  That adaptability is the mammals' great strength,  enabling them to survive in some very unlikely habitats.
  A star-nosed mole,  possessor of perhaps the most extraordinary nose on the planet.
  Its nostrils are surrounded by 22 fingers,  fingers that allow the mole to sense the world around it  by touch alone.
  It enables it to detect food with astonishing speed.
  It can also swim.
  And once underwater, its nose helps it in a most extraordinary way.
  It blows out a bubble and breathes it back in,  detecting in a millisecond if there's prey close by.
  This bubble-blowing allows it to sniff out its food underwater.
  But unfortunately, that means it soon runs out of breath.
  So it's just as well that it can hunt as fast down here as on the surface.
  Few creatures can hunt equally successfully  underground and underwater.
  Bandhavgarh, India,  at the height of the dry season.
  A chital deer.
  They must live their lives with all their senses at a high pitch.
  The faintest smell,  the slightest sound,  the briefest glimpse  could give warning of an attack.
  The chital must detect their enemy  before it takes them by surprise.
  And they have allies.
  Langur monkeys.
  Keen eyesight and a perch high in the trees  means they can scan the forest.
  (BIRD CALLING)  The jungle is full of distraction.
  (INSECT BUZZING)  Senses are strained trying to detect approaching danger.
  Yet the chital still need to feed.
  And the hunter must get within striking distance.
  There's a hint of danger carried on the wind.
  The herd shares a nervousness.
  You should never run from what you can't see.
  You might just run straight into danger.
  The tiger is nearly close enough to launch her attack.
  She must wait.
  The chital need to come just a little closer.
  If she moves now, the langurs will see her.
  The deer had a moment's head start, and escape.
  The langurs' vigilance saved the chital.
  And the tiger goes hungry.
  For some mammals, attack is the best form of defence.
  This squirrel is arming herself.
  It's a California ground squirrel and she's found a snake skin.
  She's chewing it into a paste which she then rubs into her fur,  especially her tail.
  She now stinks of snake.
  She lives in a colony that extends across a wide expanse of prairie.
  There is one downside to this neighbourhood,  it's in the middle of rattlesnake country,  not good when you have young to raise.
  Her neighbour has sensed something.
  A rattlesnake hidden right next to their burrow.
  They both investigate, but what can they do?  Kicking stones only provokes the snake.
  (RATTLING)  Rattlesnakes sense prey by the heat they give off,  and the squirrel is able to take advantage of this.
  (RATTLING)  She heats up her tail with warm blood,  waving it at the snake as a threat.
  It makes her look much larger than she is.
  (RATTLING)  And the scent of rattler on her fluffed tail  intimidates the snake.
  It decides to retreat.
  The mother decides that this part of the neighbourhood is too dangerous  and moves her young to new quarters.
  With luck, this may be a safer place to raise a family.
  Both predator and prey must endlessly refine their strategies.
  Just occasionally, an individual makes a unique breakthrough  and learns to do something completely new.
  It's December, and a storm rages around the Falkland Islands.
  Gentoo penguins face blizzards of blowing sand.
  Young elephant seals risk being dragged off the rocks  by the surging waves and swept out into open water.
  Orca, the largest and most predatory of the dolphin family.
  Killer whales.
  This pod of nine can only survive here by being opportunists.
  Normally, young elephant seals are not on the menu.
  They stay close to the shore, safe in the shallows of their nursery pool.
  The pool is almost entirely cut off from the sea.
  A narrow, shallow channel is the only access to the open water.
  But this pod of killer whales  contains a very special female.
  She's easily identified by her calf, which is always close by.
  Every year she comes to the pool at the same time,  when the seals first swim in the shallows.
  She knows how to get them.
  (PUPS BARKING)  Negotiating the channel is her first challenge.
  The water near the mouth of the pool is slightly deeper.
  Here she sets her ambush,  waiting for the seal to stray out of the shallows.
  For mother and calf, this is an extremely risky ploy.
  She must continuously assess how big the waves are,  how deep the water is and what the tide is doing.
  One bad decision will see both mother and calf stranded.
  The seals lie in the shallows, just out of reach  and unaware of her presence.
  But she is more than aware of the dropping tide.
  The floundering seal catches her attention.
  And with her calf, she slowly moves towards it.
  The seal is lying right on the edge of a rocky ledge,  oblivious to the danger.
  The projecting ledge keeps the seal just out of reach.
  Yet she has a plan.
  Rocking back and forth, she's making a wave,  trying to wash the seal off the ledge.
  But it is securely surrounded by kelp.
  A splash alerts her to a better opportunity.
  Another seal has started to swim into the pool.
  This is her chance.
  Edging further into the shallows than ever before, she is risking everything.
  Half-beached and with a struggling seal in her mouth,  it takes all her strength to drag it out of the pool.
  She is the only killer whale on the planet  that knows how to hunt these seals in this way.
  And crucially, she's now passing on that skill to her own calf.
  Extraordinary strategies like these  lie at the heart of the struggle between predator and prey.
  They're born of a conflict that is relentless and unforgiving,  a conflict that eternally binds the hunter and the hunted.
  This is looking very promising.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The Life team had set themselves a tough challenge  in trying to film exceptional hunting sequences.
  But our teams were lucky enough  to observe some of the world's most charismatic predators.
  Look.
 Look.
  It was the killer whales of the Falklands, though,  that brought the team closest to the action.
  Every year off Sea Lion Island,  killer whales snatch young elephant seals from their nursery pool.
  Filming most hunting sequences  involves a great deal of waiting and a slice of luck,  but here things were a little different.
  Cameraman Mike Pitts and producer Adam Chapman travel to the Falklands,  having heard that for two weeks each year  killer whales focus on one particular spot.
  PILOT: We're a long ways out  The killer whales have learnt to target elephant seal pups  as they first venture into the water,  and this gives the team their best chance of filming a hunt.
  The first task facing the team is to familiarise themselves  not only with a new location,  but also with the animals they will be working around.
  And the team soon realise that they and their equipment  are a great novelty to the seal pups.
  I daren't look through the camera  because I'm more worried about the tripod being knocked over.
  So, we've got a little friend here.
  So I'm going to report him for interfering with the film crew.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The pups' fascination with the team is rather unexpected.
  (SNORTING)  MAN: You've got a great way with wildlife, Michael.
  (LAUGHS)  At one with nature.
  Um It's quite difficult out here, there's so many of them.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The large number of youngsters  bodes well for the killer whales  but the longer the team spend with the pups,  the more they warm to them.
  PITTS: When you look at these little pups,  you can't fail to be captivated by them.
  Especially when you gaze into those eyes,  it really pulls at your heartstrings.
  But to an orca, of course,  it's 120 kilos of pure protein.
  So that's why they're hunted.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the days go by,  the team continue to get a feel for the location,  when suddenly, the killer whales arrive.
  The pod of nine is clearly interested in the pool  and one female is particularly confident.
  She's coming in.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The female and her calf start to come into the pool regularly,  but there never seems to be a pup within reach.
  The team have come to the Falklands prepared to film underwater.
  Now the time has come to see if this is a realistic ambition.
  With lookouts posted and the whales far away,  Mike is able to get in.
  Even so,  who can blame him for being jumpy?  Whoo!  ATTENBOROUGH: The pups' playfulness is becoming an issue.
  The last thing the team want  is to have any influence on the events they're here to film.
  There's also the question of how the killer whales might react  to a person in the water.
  It's quite intimidating in there.
  It shelves up, in the centre of the channel  it just goes down to, I don't know, maybe eight feet, I think,  couple of metres.
  But the visibility's really stirred up.
  How they find their way in that channel I just don't know.
  What I'm worried about is if I do go in the water with the orca,  which I'm slightly concerned about, I have to say,  she's in a hunting mode.
 She's not here just to pass the time of day.
  - She's out there to kill something.
 - Yeah.
  You know, I just don't want to be that personal seal,  whatever she thinks of me.
  She'd probably realise once she's bitten me that she's made a mistake.
  - I don't know, is it worth the gamble? - Right.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With a week already gone,  the killer whales have not yet made a full-blown attack.
  And then the weather changes.
  Well, hopefully it'll blow itself out,  but I think in the pool, it's gonna be a couple of days before that calms down.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The storm rages for two more days,  but on the eleventh day the good weather returns.
  Mike knows that time is running out.
  Well, the orcas are out there.
 Still quite a way off.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team decides a camera on the end of a pole  might be the way to reveal the underwater action.
  After that storm it's all been so stirred up.
  And just bring it slightly out of the water,  Adam, so, can you draw it back towards you? And stop.
  Ah, it's dark green, basically.
 Very dark green.
  - There's still a lot of - Suspension, yeah.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The storm had stirred up the pool,  making it hard to see anything.
 But the team remained in good spirits.
  - Does my bum look big in this? - (CHUCKLES) Massive.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the seal pups are nearly ready to go to sea,  the whales' opportunity to hunt this year will soon pass  and the team know this could be their last chance.
  CHAPMAN: Look at the size of that fin.
  Okay, Mike, she's coming in.
 Coming in, Mike.
  - Coming in? - Just here.
  Mike?  One second, mate.
  I can talk to you gently here now,  and I can also see where you're pointing.
  CHAPMAN: She's here.
  PITTS: Recording.
 Hold it steady.
 Hold it steady.
  Got it.
  She's gone past, Mike.
 She's in the pool.
  PITTS: Okay, I'll go in there.
  Good God.
 It got one.
 Definitely.
 Can't mistake it.
  - Bringing it out now.
 - Taking it further.
 Come on, go.
  Pulling it out.
  Taking it out to sea.
  CHAPMAN: Yeah, there it goes.
 Taking it under.
  PITTS: God, he just got hammered.
  Part of me is elated that I've got it, but part of me is sort of sad, really,  'cause I've watched these little characters, these pups  grow in the last few weeks,  and the orcas, too, they've got to survive  and they've made a successful hunt,  and they're now continuing on their journey, so what can you say?  ATTENBOROUGH: Witnessing such events  often results in such a conflict of emotions.
  The two-week window is over and the killer whales move on.
  It'll be a whole year before this exceptional female  returns here to hunt again.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: The ocean, the largest habitat on Earth  and an inhospitable place for those of us who live on land.
  Yet, for a billion years,  this was the only place on the planet where life existed.
  Today, descendants of those early life forms  continue to thrive.
  They share the sea with fish but outnumber them by 10 to one.
  They have no backbones  and have evolved into countless different forms.
  Some are huge, large-brained and intelligent.
  Others are miniscule,  yet build the largest natural structures on the planet.
  They are marine invertebrates, the creatures of the deep.
  They have colonised every corner of the ocean  and have a mind-boggling range  of solutions to the problem of staying alive.
  The ocean is by no means uniform.
  Differences in depth, temperature, sunlight and currents  pose particular challenges.
  One and a half miles down, these hydro-thermal vents  spew out super-heated water at 450 degrees centigrade  from cracks in the Earth's crust.
  Despite the enormous pressure,  the total darkness and the scaldingly high temperatures,  the ancestors of all life may have evolved  in a place just like this.
  Pompeii worms,  so named for their ability to survive volcanic heat.
  They share the vents with crabs and two-metre-long tube worms.
  They can only survive here  because they're able to feed on bacteria that thrive around the vents.
  These colonies are extremely rare.
  Not surprisingly, most life thrives nearer the surface,  where feeding is considerably easier.
  These are krill, tiny shrimp-like crustaceans.
  Swarms can reach astounding numbers, 60,000 per cubic metre.
  During the night, they rise towards the surface to feed on plankton.
  Here, in the Sea of Cortez off Mexico,  the swarms attract hunters of all kinds,  from humpback whales to shoals of predatory fish.
  Yet another hunter arrives.
 It's one from the deep.
  A Humboldt squid.
  Two metres long, they have a local reputation  as man-eaters.
  Alone they are formidable enough.
  But this is a pack of hundreds.
  They're highly intelligent hunters.
  Their eyesight is exceptional.
  They have powerful tentacles, suckers ringed with 70,000 hooks  and a razor-sharp beak for tearing through flesh.
  Now the fish find that they are under attack,  and so group together for safety.
  But the Humboldt squid work as a team, herding the fish against the rocks.
  It's thought that the squid flash red and white  not only to confuse their prey,  but also to signal to each other when they are about to attack.
  Humboldt squid numbers are growing rapidly,  but they remain mysterious.
  As fast as they arrived, they disappear back into the deep.
  Eight hundred miles from the South Pole,  in the shadow of a smouldering Mount Erebus.
  Winter temperatures are a punishing minus 40.
  This, perhaps, is the last place you might expect to find marine life.
  Now it's the beginning of the polar spring  and for the first time in months, light reaches the sea beneath the ice.
  It's extremely cold  and completely dark for much of the year,  so conditions are not unlike those of the deep ocean.
  Yet in McMurdo Sound, life flourishes.
  The creatures here grow extremely slowly,  but that does mean they can reach a great age and great size.
  And they occur in surprisingly large numbers.
  Three-metre-long carnivorous Nemertine worms,  red sea stars and urchins carpet the sea floor.
  This monster worm will eat almost anything  and is constantly scanning the sea floor for food.
  Animals are swarming here in such numbers because of this,  a dead seal pup.
  Such a great quantity of food may only arrive once in 10 years.
  But a seal's body won't be easy to eat.
  Nemertines have a snout like a harpoon,  that enables them to puncture the skin of the corpse.
  It's harder work for the sea stars.
  They feed by pushing out their stomachs through their mouths.
  As this sea star presses its stomach against the seal's skin,  it secrets digestive juices that dissolve the seal's tissue.
  But that takes time.
  These scavengers will feed here throughout the summer,  until all that remains of the seal  will be a skeleton stripped bare.
  The shallows are only a tiny part of the marine world,  90% of it is open water.
  Its currents carry life for thousands of miles.
  The masters of this nomadic existence are jellyfish.
  A life spent drifting in the empty ocean could be a lonely one,  but not for this jellyfish.
  Aurelia.
  Swarms like this are not accidental.
  These individuals all hatched together  when the temperature and currents were just right.
  Their timing has ensured that they can make the most of feeding  on a late summer plankton bloom.
  Jellyfish have no brain and no blood.
  But they do have eyespots  that enable them to tell the difference between light and dark.
  And they can move independently of the current  by a simple form of jet propulsion.
  All jellyfish have stinging tentacles with which to catch their food.
  As they pulse their bodies, the tentacles trap plankton,  which is then passed towards their mouth in the centre.
  A swarm of 100,000 stinging jellyfish  might seem a daunting prospect for a predator.
  But not for this one.
  A huge fried egg jellyfish.
  It is a killer.
  Its weapons are harpoon-like cells that cover its tentacles.
  When they come into contact with a victim,  they spear it.
  The fried egg then hauls in its prey.
  A few lucky Aurelia do manage to pull themselves free.
  But for the majority there's only one outcome,  death.
  Jellyfish, like a great many marine invertebrates,  have soft, vulnerable bodies.
  They are protected by stinging cells.
  But there are other kinds of defence.
  Armour plating.
  These are spider crabs.
  They spend most of their lives in deep water.
  But once a year, off the coast of southern Australia,  a quarter of a million crabs  set off on a long journey to the shallows.
  They're here because they all share a problem.
  Each crab has been wearing the same suit of armour for a year now.
  And it's getting uncomfortably tight.
  So each crab eventually has to shed its shell  and produce a bigger one.
  Replacing an old shell is, understandably, a tricky process.
  First, the crab grows  an entirely new skin within the old shell.
  It then flexes its body to force its shell  to split along the back  (CRACKING)  before gingerly backing itself out.
  The spider crabs are not only here to moult, but to mate.
  And they grab the opportunity with considerable enthusiasm.
  Coming together in such numbers does, however, have a drawback.
  It attracts predators.
  A stingray.
  Despite there being so many potential prey,  the stingray seems to ignore them.
  Perhaps there's safety in numbers.
  Although not all the crabs are prepared to rely on it.
  Alarm spreads amongst the crabs.
  But in fact, most of them are safe.
  This ray is being very choosy.
  It's only interested in the softest-shelled,  most recently moulted crabs.
  Once a target is singled out, there is no escape.
  When their new armour has hardened,  the crabs return to the comparative safety of the deep,  leaving behind only their old empty shells.
  Like spider crabs, the behaviour of most marine creatures  is controlled by a very simple nervous system.
  But there are exceptions.
  This cuttlefish is one of the cleverest animals in the ocean.
  She has a very large brain.
  In fact, it's larger for her size  than that of most fish or reptiles.
  Her life is both complex and full of intrigue.
  Giant Australian cuttlefish usually live alone,  but once in their short lives they must come together to mate.
  As she approaches the traditional mating grounds,  one of the largest males starts to show interest in her.
  She moves him away from his rivals to a quieter spot,  a place where she will be able to lay her eggs in safety.
  The male takes the female in his arms and turns her to face him,  before using one of his arms to pass sacks of sperm  to an opening near her mouth.
  Once mated, he hovers over her,  standing guard until she's laid her eggs.
  But he's got a problem.
  Males outnumber females four to one,  so keeping her to himself is a constant battle.
  This larger rival is more difficult to intimidate.
  Cuttlefish can make very dramatic changes  to their skin pattern in order to signal their moods.
  Flashes of bright colour and stripes that pulse along his side  tell the rival to keep off.
  Most rivals back down at this stage, but not this one.
  Although the male's flashing signals get more and more emphatic,  in the end he has no choice but to fight.
  Victory! And the male can return to guard his female.
  Cuttlefish are great communicators  but there is a flipside.
  They can also be masters of deception.
  This male is too small to fight for a mate  but he has another plan and it's sneaky.
  He approaches the couple cautiously,  holding his tentacles tucked up at the front,  mimicking a female that wants to mate.
  To complete his disguise,  he changes colour to appear even more like a female.
  The guarding male seems convinced,  maybe he thinks his luck is in.
  Another female to add to his conquests.
  The sly, cross-dressing male edges closer and closer to the female  holding his nerve.
  As long as he avoids being grabbed in a mating embrace,  the sneak is safe.
  At what point the female guesses his true identity is unclear.
  But she isn't choosy,  and surreptitiously mates with him  right under the larger male's tentacles.
  It's time for the female to lay her eggs.
  Using the sperm from both males,  she fertilises her eggs one by one  and glues them to a rock in a hidden crevice.
  With luck, she will now have a mix of offspring.
  Some may become masterful males  and others little sneaks.
  She'll have all the bases covered.
  The coastal waters of British Columbia,  home to this four-metre-long Pacific giant octopus.
  She is a formidable predator,  but at the moment hunting isn't on her mind.
  She has just mated for the first time.
  And now she's searching for a safe refuge.
  She makes her choice carefully.
  This is going to be her home for many months to come.
  It's her nursery den.
  A hundred thousand eggs hang from its ceiling  and she's guarding them with her life.
  Without her to protect them,  they would be eaten by predators or become diseased.
  She caresses them with her tentacles,  ensuring that algae don't grow on them and that fish don't eat them.
  She constantly keeps the water moving around them  so they're well supplied with oxygen.
  She cares for them for six months,  and during all this time she doesn't eat a thing.
  And now, as they are hatching, she is dying.
  One night, as the baby octopus emerge,  she jets water over them for the last time,  helping them on their way.
  This will be her final act.
  This is the only time she will reproduce  and to give her young their best chance, she sacrifices her life.
  Out of the depths comes one of the largest  and most aggressive starfish in the ocean.
  Pycnopodia, a giant sun star  the size of a dustbin lid.
  It's a hunter.
  Each arm is covered by supersensitive tube feet  that can detect prey by touch and smell.
  But the sun star is also partial to carrion  and it detects the carcass of the giant octopus mother.
  The miniature suckers on its feet  tamp onto the corpse and drag it out of the cave.
  Other scavengers rush to join the feast.
  Although it's a fearsome predator,  Pycnopodia doesn't have it all its own way.
  These sea urchins aren't speedy enough to escape,  but they do have a formidable defence.
  The sharp spines are hard to get past.
  And what's more, the urchins can move each spine independently,  pinching the starfish's probing arms.
  Trapped by an army of urchins,  Pycnopodia is spotted by an enormous king crab.
  Pycnopodia has more than met its match  and within seconds, the crab rips off one of its arms.
  But that is just a temporary inconvenience.
  Starfish are able to quickly regrow a lost limb.
  The most impressive invertebrates may seem to be the giants,  but in fact, it's some of the smallest that can make the biggest impact.
  Every square inch of this island  has been created by an ever-growing living superstructure,  a coral reef.
  It's taken thousands of years to reach this size  and it all began with creatures smaller than a pin head.
  A reef can't be built just anywhere.
  It needs something to give it a firm footing.
  A wreck like this provides an excellent foundation.
  As soon as it settles on the seabed,  the wreck comes under attack from invaders,  plankton, carried here by ocean currents.
  These are the microscopic larvae of barnacles, sponges  and most importantly, corals.
  The larvae must attach themselves to the wreck.
  Once there, they can develop into young corals called polyps.
  But the polyps are very slow-growing  and there is lots of competition from other invaders.
  Algae quickly cover the wreck  and that's a problem for the young coral.
  Algae attract grazers.
  The polyps are in danger of being eaten  before they've even got a proper foothold.
  If conditions are right, the survivors can go on to build a reef.
  Position is critical.
  Too deep, and not enough light will reach the corals for them to grow.
  Too shallow, and they risk being exposed to the air at low tide.
  For the reef to really flourish,  it also needs to be in the path of currents carrying food.
  Fast-forward half a dozen years or so  and the wreck will begin to show the first signs of corals  visible to the naked eye.
  A decade later and the wreck will be transformed.
  Thousands of polyps will form coral heads  that encrust its surface.
  This ship was sunk during the Second World War  and there has been enough time for a substantial reef to develop.
  After decades of growth,  different species of corals dominate particular areas of the wreck.
  The fastest growing types grow best on the edges and overhangs,  reaching far out into the water and up to the light.
  They need only a small area to establish themselves,  yet they can rapidly grow dozens of plates or branches crammed with polyps  to gather as much light as possible.
  Slower-growing, much more robust corals, like these brain corals,  are better suited to the heart of the developing reef.
  It's these that give the reef their structure and permanence.
  There could be nearly 500 different species here,  each striving to win a foothold on the rusting hulk.
  The pace of life for corals may seem to be so slow  that it's hard to imagine that there is any conflict here.
  But as night falls, the mood on the reef changes.
  Corals are, in fact, extremely aggressive  and will fight to death to expand their territory.
  There can be no honourable retreat.
  A winner will literally eat its enemy alive.
  Along the battlefront, the polyps of both combatants  extrude their guts, long threadlike filaments,  over their opponents.
  At the fringe, all that remains of the destroyed polyps  are their skeletons.
  The coral that can digest fastest wins.
  Corals constantly grow  over the skeletons of their dead comrades,  building a bigger and bigger reef.
  Then, just once a year, a few days after the November full moon,  the corals take part in a mass spawning event.
  Millions of eggs and sperm are released into the water  and join to develop into larvae  that drift in search of a place to settle.
  Eventually, every inch of the wreck's surface will be colonised.
  The steel will rust away and the reef will be on its own.
  Most reefs grow without the help of a wreck to start them off.
  But given time, they can create something as huge as this,  the Great Barrier Reef, the largest living structure on earth.
  A coral reef rivals even a rainforest for its diversity of life,  yet corals like this are found in waters where food is very scarce.
  All the creatures here  have had to adopt a different and highly specialised way  to gather every nourishing scrap.
  Christmas tree worms bore into the coral's skeleton for protection,  swirling out and grabbing food particles with their feathery gills.
  Coral barnacles are, in fact, related to lobsters.
  They lie on their backs, waving their feet  to gather any food floating past.
  Crabs have evolved many different ways of gathering food.
  This porcelain crab  has a fan of filaments on his front legs.
  A boxer crab attaches a tiny sea anemone to each fist.
  As well as for defence,  he uses their sticky tentacles to gather passing plankton.
  This orangutan crab's whole body is coated with sticky hairs,  in this case, perhaps just a bit too sticky.
  This strange creature is a sea cucumber.
  It uses its tentacles to grab food from the sediment.
  There are hunters here, too, like these nudibranchs or sea slugs.
  Their vibrant colours are a warning that they are toxic.
  There are over 3,000 species, many hunt just one specific prey.
  Some hunt each other.
  This emperor shrimp makes the most of the poisonous nature of its host.
  But it's a rather one-sided affair.
  As it feeds, the shrimp gets protection and a free ride.
  Other shrimps have developed a more balanced relationship.
  Some even solicit for partners.
  These dance for their dinner.
  And these advertise to passers-by that they are open for business.
  They are a parasite removal team,  providing a service for countless fish on the reef,  including those that could happily eat them.
  In return for their bravery, they get a meal that comes to them.
  Coral reefs, built by the tiniest of creatures,  occupy less than half of 1% of the ocean's floor.
  Yet they support a quarter of all marine species.
  Marine creatures, all without backbones, from corals to cuttlefish to crabs,  make up the majority of life in the oceans.
  But they have also had a surprisingly important impact  beyond the marine world.
  Their fossilised bodies, shells and skeletons  form the limestone and chalk that now covers huge tracts  of Asia, Europe and the Americas.
  They may be small, but over their two billion year history,  they have literally changed the world.
  To capture some of the sequences in this episode,  the Life team had to take underwater filming into uncharted territory.
  One shoot meant spending weeks diving under two metres of ice,  another involved laying the foundation for a new coral reef in the tropics.
  A sunken ship can make an ideal location for corals to grow.
  So with this in mind, the Life team set themselves a challenge,  to make their very own shipwreck.
  After months of searching,  they find a boat in the Bahamas that might be suitable.
  But there's a lot to do before it can be sunk to the seabed.
  This prow been here for how many years? Eight years on the jetty?  All this fibreglass insulation, it's all got to be removed.
  - MAN: Yes.
 - And, um  - It's all hands to the pump, Ian.
 - It is.
  I'm going to go and get a pair of overalls.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team have to put away their cameras and get their hands dirty.
  I've got a 50-tonne boat and I'm trying to clean it with a paint scraper.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Thoroughly cleaning the boat  increases the chance that coral will grow on it  and ensures it won't pollute the sea.
  Like Changing Rooms, isn't it?  ATTENBOROUGH: After eight years rusting on the jetty,  there's no guarantee that she will even float.
  We actually We do have some holes.
  Pull up.
  To get this ship ready in time for the inspectors is a massive task.
  And they're doing a brilliant job, and we're cutting panels through  to let the water rush through it when she starts sinking.
  Right, in you go.
 That's the last bit.
 Okay, guys.
  - Vamoose! - MAN: Yeah.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Ship-shape at last.
  Well, she's clean, she's been inspected, she's ready to be sunk.
  What can go wrong now?  - ANCHORWOMAN: Here's Kevin.
 - Christina, here's the very latest  ATTENBOROUGH: As the tail end of Hurricane Dean sweeps through,  the team are forced to put their plans on hold.
  KEVIN: winds of 150 miles an hour  ATTENBOROUGH: Luck doesn't seem to be on their side.
  (WEATHER REPORT ON RADIO, INDISTINCT)  But two days later, good weather returns.
  Here comes the crane.
 Finally.
  Fingers crossed, arms crossed, legs crossed, everything is crossed.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They urgently need to get the boat into the water  or they won't reach the chosen wreck site before nightfall.
  She's safely in the water.
 So far, so good.
  It floats!  ATTENBOROUGH: Her final voyage.
  Cameras are mounted around the deck to film her sinking below the surface.
  We've spent a week preparing for this and finally the afternoon's arrived.
  But the light's going very quickly so we have to make a move.
  ATTENBOROUGH: A last few holes are cut.
  It's time to pump in water and to abandon ship.
  The crew dive in, ready to film her descent,  while the support boat moves away to a safe distance.
  There's nothing more to do but wait.
  Here we go, look at this!  MAN: Great bounce, great bounce, great bounce!  ATTENBOROUGH: She gently comes to rest,  and the right way up, just as they'd hoped.
  Now it's time to let nature take its course.
  The crew will be back over the next two years  to see how life takes hold.
  At this site, the wreck has a very good chance  that it'll be colonised by coral.
  With luck and time, it will eventually become a full-scale reef.
  Meanwhile, at the other end of the world,  the Life team's challenge is very different.
  Here in Antarctica, just getting underwater will be tough.
  In order to work in such a demanding location,  the team needed the help of the National Science Foundation  at the McMurdo Polar Research Station.
  Everyone here has to be able to cope out on the ice if there's an emergency.
  So the Life team joins research scientists  for survival training, to prepare them for any situation.
  Even one like this.
  A colleague lost in a whiteout is very serious.
  This training might mean the difference between rescue or not.
  This is supposed to simulate a whiteout.
  We'll be looking for someone who's been lost.
  And you wear the bucket so that you cannot see at all what is going on.
  And it does actually work.
  It's just You can't see anything in this.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With the training over,  it's time to travel over the ice to the dive site,  ready to go beneath the frozen surface of the Ross Sea.
  But to get through this ice, thick enough to land a jet on,  needs the help of McMurdo's specialist drilling team.
  Once the hole is drilled,  a specially designed hut is slid into position.
  This will be the team's base for the next four weeks of diving.
  Look, this is all we need.
 All we need to go in here.
  The door to another world.
  ATTENBOROUGH: All the equipment the team need for the shots  must come in and out of this hole.
  And this is as far south as it's possible to dive.
  The ice, eight feet thick, it's here for eleven and a half months of the year.
  And we're gonna go down underneath and have a look  to see just what it's like underneath here.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Doug and the team venture below the ice.
  The under-ice landscape is both surprising and spectacular.
  But it's the animals they've come to film.
  So specialist time-lapse cameras are moved into position.
  The animals move very slowly at these freezing temperatures,  but by using time-lapse to speed up the action 500 times,  the team hopes to reveal the behaviour of these creatures for the first time.
  With air and warmth running out for this dive,  Doug makes his way back to the lifeline and the surface.
  (INHALING DEEPLY)  (EXCLAIMS)  That is amazing! That is so beautiful down there.
  All sorts of colours,  beautiful stalactites made of ice crystals  hanging down from the top of the ice.
  All sorts of things on the bottom, starfish, urchins.
  Just an amazing profusion of life.
  Really lovely, totally unique, not like anywhere else.
  However, after an hour underwater, it is getting pretty cold.
  So can you give me a hand up, please? Thanks.
  ATTENBOROUGH: There would be another month here, and over 100 dives  before the sequence was eventually completed.
 
                    ATTENBOROUGH: Plants have a family tree  stretching back nearly half a billion years.
  They have developed an extraordinary range of strategies to survive.
  This tree is a bristlecone pine.
  It's taken thousands of years to reach this size.
  It has seen empires rise and fall,  kings, queens and presidents come and go,  and may have seen the sun rise more than one and a half million times.
  Bristlecone pines are the oldest living things on Earth.
  Bamboo is the fastest growing plant.
  It will be full-grown, 30 metres tall, in just 90 days.
  Like animals, plants are constantly competing for food,  striving to produce offspring  and battling against predators.
  They will deceive  and in some cases they will even hunt.
  We often don't notice such dramatic behaviour  because to our eyes, it happens so slowly.
  But if time is compressed and you shift perspective  to the plant's point of view, their world comes spectacularly to life.
  The events in this woodland can build to a view of half a year  in less than a minute.
  Like animals, plants need food and water.
  But what sets them apart is their struggle for light.
  Plants must have light in order to grow  and will do anything to get as much as they need.
  The forest might appear to be the perfect place for plants to thrive.
  Yet down here on the forest floor  is one of the hardest places imaginable for a young plant to begin its life.
  The canopy above is so thick that only a little sunlight can filter through.
  For this sapling, too little light means death.
  But plants on the forest floor need not be passive.
  If the light won't come to them, they can go to the light.
  But they still have a problem.
  The light is 50 metres above them.
  So they must climb.
  It's much easier to use another plant as scaffolding.
  But they won't get very high unless they can hold on tight.
  Like fingertips searching for a hold,  this ivy's adhesive pads grip the bark.
  Instead of sticking to the trees, some climbers use sharp claws.
  The cat's claw creeper hooks its tendrils into the tiniest crevices  and hauls itself to the top.
  With every metre it climbs, the light gets a little stronger,  fuelling more growth.
  This tendril of a passion flower seems to flail aimlessly in midair,  but in fact it's searching for an anchor point.
  Its tendril coils on itself, pulling the plant towards its support.
  In a matter of just days, these climbers make it to the canopy.
  Now, with light in plentiful supply, these plants are able to flower.
  Other plants have a different strategy to find the light they need  in the crowded forest.
  These are air plants.
  They grow on the upper branches of tall trees  and spend their whole lives basking in the light.
  But growing 50 metres above the ground does have its drawbacks.
  Most plants get water and nutrients through their roots in the ground.
  For an air plant, with their roots planted in the treetops,  this isn't an option.
  But they have a solution.
  First, the bare roots have an extraordinary ability  to soak up water like blotting paper.
  The slightest rain or mist, and they absorb every drop.
  They also have a way of gathering nutrients.
  Their roots trap falling leaves, which eventually rot  and provide the plants with their own personal supply of compost.
  Twenty thousand different plants,  orchids, bromeliads and ferns have taken up this remarkable lifestyle.
  For a plant to thrive, it must not only get enough nutrients  but also the right balance of nutrients.
  The soil in this water-logged bog is very poor quality, lacking in nitrogen.
  But these strange plants have an ingenious strategy.
  Their leaves are covered in tentacles tipped with droplets  of what appears to be morning dew.
  These droplets give the plant its name, the sundew.
  They're sweet smelling and attractive to many insects.
  But they're also extremely sticky.
  Mosquitoes emerge in huge numbers from the boggy water  and the sundews are ready.
  (MOSQUITO BUZZING)  The sundew's tentacles are living flypaper.
  Struggling only makes matters worse.
  With each contact, the plant tightens its grip.
  As more and more tentacles envelope the prey,  the droplets spread across its body.
  (STIFLED BUZZING)  Eventually the insect is smothered and drowns in sticky fluid.
  Digestive enzymes break down the body into a nitrogen-rich meal,  which is absorbed by the plant.
  Without animal tissues, this plant would not survive.
  But there's another carnivorous plant  that's an even more sophisticated predator.
  The Venus flytrap.
  Like the sundew, it makes itself very attractive,  oozing nectar across the brim of each leaf.
  But any visiting insect had better watch out for these six tiny hairs.
  This fly has to tread carefully.
  If it strikes one hair,  it can carry on feeding  but a timer has been set.
  A second strike in less than 20 seconds and the fly is doomed.
  (FLY BUZZING WILDLY)  An electrical impulse is triggered  and the leaf snaps shut in just a fraction of a second.
  The tips lock together like prison bars.
  If the fly is very big or very small, it may just manage to escape.
  (BUZZING)  But most are trapped  and die.
  Ten days later, the trap reopens.
  All that remains is a husk.
  The plant has finished its meal  and resets itself for its next victim.
  But there is one time of year  when the Venus flytrap needs some of the visiting insects to live.
  It needs their help to be pollinated.
  It sends up flowers on tall stems,  well away from the danger of the traps below.
  Here, insects can feed safely on nectar.
  In return, they provide a vital service,  carrying pollen from flower to flower.
  But the truce is only temporary.
  When pollination is over, it's back to business as usual.
  80% of plant species on Earth have flowers.
  Flowers have just one role,  to enable the plant to produce offspring.
  Colour, perfume, nectar and shape  all act to make a flower irresistible.
  Sunflowers grow to face the rising sun.
  The warmth of the rays speeds the production of nectar  and this lures pollinators.
  One after another, hundreds of individual florets  produce pollen-covered stamens.
  And like most flowers,  sunflowers establish a close relationship with animals  in order to ensure their reproduction.
  As these bees busily feed on nectar,  they unwittingly brush against the stamens, collecting pollen,  and then carry it from flower to flower.
  The sunflower is fertilised.
  In the sun-drenched fields of southern France,  the flowering season is a long one.
  But not all plants have this luxury.
  Cradle Mountain in Tasmania is blasted by bitter Antarctic winds.
  (WIND HOWLING)  To reproduce, the richea honey bush must flower.
  But the delicate parts of the flowers risk being damaged by the cold.
  The plant appears to have an ingenious solution.
  The flower petals fuse together,  forming an insulated protective case around its stamens.
  However, this creates another problem.
  The flower case is so well sealed  that unfortunately, it also keeps out pollinating insects.
  During brief sunny spells, the flowers warm up  and suddenly start producing nectar.
  This attracts a bird, the black currawong.
  It has the strength to rip open the flowers' outer casing  and gets its reward of nectar.
  At the same time, it exposes the delicate stamens to waiting insects.
  With luck, there's enough time for pollination  before the biting wind kills the flowers.
  For some plants, the relationship with their pollinators is not collaborative,  it's war.
  Butterflies, and in such numbers,  would seem to be perfect pollinators for any flower.
  The sandhill milkweed blooms every spring in the sandy meadows of Florida.
  It times its flowering perfectly to match the arrival  of monarch butterflies migrating here from Mexico.
  The monarchs search out milkweed plants,  but they have something other than pollination on their minds.
  Rather than collect pollen, this female lays her eggs on the milkweed leaf.
  This is the only plant the caterpillars can eat.
  But the milkweed has a defence mechanism.
  As a caterpillar bites into a vein,  a kind of latex swells out, engulfing it.
  If the caterpillar isn't quick it will drown,  or find its jaws glued together.
  The plant's defence is so effective that only one third  of the monarch caterpillars make it through the first day.
  But the caterpillars that survive grow in size and strength.
  And they go for the jugular.
  By carefully chewing through the main vein,  the caterpillar drains the leaf of latex  and cuts off its supply.
  The milkweed's leaf is now defenceless and the caterpillar eats in safety,  before preparing to pupate into a butterfly.
  But after about 10 days,  it becomes clear why the plant has endured this onslaught.
  A newly hatched monarch  simply can't resist the nectar-filled cups of the milkweed flowers.
  As it moves across the flower heads,  its feet slide between grooves in the petals,  where the flower's pollen sacs are waiting.
  As it flies off,  the monarch's feet hook out the pollen and carry it to the next flower,  and pollination is achieved.
  Although the milkweed has paid a heavy price,  in the end, it used the monarch to get its way.
  Here in Dominica, there's a plant that is so manipulative  that it has enslaved its pollinator.
  The bright red structures of the heliconia  are actually modified leaves.
  These are its flowers.
  They may be small, but they play a very important role,  keeping nectar well-guarded at the very bottom of their long stems.
  The purple-throated Carib hummingbird, with its long, curved beak,  is the only bird capable of reaching this energy-rich food.
  But cleverly, the heliconia rations the amount of nectar it produces  to force the hummingbird into returning to the flower time and time again.
  Every time it makes a visit, it picks up more pollen on its beak and feathers.
  The hummingbird is like an addict.
 Not only does it never stray,  but it will aggressively defend the flowers from thieves.
  The plant is the master in this relationship.
  To ensure it gets pollinated, heliconia has made the hummingbird its prisoner.
  A plant's problems don't end once it's been pollinated.
  Plants need to spread their seeds as far away as possible,  otherwise the adults will be in direct competition with their offspring.
  Here in South Africa,  one flower achieves this by performing a remarkable trick.
  (THUNDER CLAPPING)  The plant waits dormant underground for more than a year.
  The first heavy rains for many months  are the trigger the plant has been waiting for.
  Brunsvigia burst into flower.
  Their timing is perfect.
  These conditions are ideal for insects, too.
  The flowers enjoy a few days of frenzied pollination.
  But it's not long before the searing heat returns.
  The flowers start to wilt, shrivel and die.
  Brunsvigia now needs to disperse its seeds widely,  yet the flowers still have their seeds trapped inside.
  But the flower isn't finished yet.
  (WIND HOWLING)  There are strong winds that blow across this landscape.
  They snap the dry, dead stalks, sending each and every plant  cartwheeling across the ground, casting seeds as it goes.
  With the heat threatening to dry them out,  the seeds' germination has to be immediate.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  Deep in the forests of Borneo,  some plants also use the wind to disperse their seeds  but in a completely different way, by giving their seeds wings.
  Some are helicopters that twist and turn their way down to the ground.
  But there is one that has a design that enables it to travel  greater distances than all the others.
  This is Alsomitra.
  Its football-sized pod is packed full of hundreds of extraordinary seeds.
  Each is an almost aerodynamically perfect glider  that can be supported by even the slightest breeze.
  Its paper-thin upswept wings  allow it to travel hundreds of metres through the forest.
  Once the seed hits the ground, the wings rot away  and the seed starts to germinate.
  A new Alsomitra vine starts to grow up towards the canopy and into the light,  well away from its parents.
  There are other ways to disperse seeds  and plants have evolved different tactics, depending on where they live.
  In the desert of Arizona lives a master, the saguaro cactus.
  In the cool of the night, the cacti open their radiant flowers.
  They are soon visited by nectar-feeding bats.
  And as the bats move from cactus to cactus, they pollinate them.
  Each flower only lasts a night.
  But over three weeks, each cactus will produce more than 200 flowers.
  Every pollinated flower immediately begins to form a fruit at its base,  packed with thousands of seeds.
  The mature saguaro cacti are superbly adapted to survive  out in the intense heat of the Sonoran Desert.
  But their seeds are delicate and must find shade  or they will scorch to death before they germinate.
  The seeds are covered with succulent, sweet flesh,  a meal that all sorts of desert creatures find irresistible.
  White-winged doves are among the first to reach the ripening fruit.
  The seeds survive in the birds' stomachs  and will be carried many miles before being deposited in their droppings,  their own little packet of fertiliser.
  But the cactus doesn't just rely on birds.
  Fallen fruit provides a bonanza for creatures on the ground.
  Foraging ants quickly gather seeds and flesh,  that's if a tortoise doesn't get there first.
  The greater range of animals the cactus can get to eat its fruit,  the more likely the seeds within  will be carried to the perfect place to germinate.
  The ants carry the seeds underground into their nests,  often excavated among the roots of trees.
  The tortoise, too, will head for shade.
  It spends much of its day cooling off under trees,  where it's sure to leave undigested seeds in its dung.
  Now the seeds wait for the rains to come.
  (THUNDER CRACKING)  Of the 40 million or so seeds a cactus produces in its lifetime,  the chances are that only one will develop into a plant  that outlives its parent.
  If it was lucky enough to find shade,  a seed will still take 10 years to become a five-centimetre-tall cactus.
  To reach the size of its parents, possibly 10 metres,  will take at least a hundred years.
  Plants can survive in the most unlikely and inhospitable places on Earth.
  Here on Socotra, a remote island in the Arabian Sea,  the dry season is brutal.
  But this strange tree has a strategy to survive it.
  The dragon's blood tree.
  The key to their success lies in their bizarre shape.
  They live on the mountaintops where there's little soil,  but there are critical compensations.
  Occasional morning mists sweep across the high ground.
  The mist condenses on the skyward-pointing waxy leaves.
  The droplets run down to the centre of the trunk  and down to its roots.
  Water is so precious that the tree cannot afford to waste any.
  (SIZZLING)  Drops that do escape and fall to the ground are not totally lost.
  The tree's huge, densely-packed crown acts as a parasol.
  It shades the ground so effectively  it allows time for the water to seep into the sand.
  And it also shades the network of roots that lie just under the surface.
  Another plant shares this parched desert but survives in a very different way.
  The desert rose.
  In really harsh conditions, it jettisons its leaves to minimise water loss.
  Strangely, it chooses this time to flower.
  Its bulbous trunk is like a barrel that stores water all year round.
  It's so hardy it can grow out of bare rock.
  It might seem that conditions can't get much tougher for the plant than here.
  But for some, the conditions are even harsher.
  Six hours ago, here on the coast of Australia,  this tree was high and dry on a sandy beach.
  For almost all plants, saltwater is lethal,  so submersion of this tree's roots by the tide twice a day should kill it.
  Yet this red mangrove is flourishing.
  The retreating tide reveals the key to surviving the sea's assault.
  The mangrove's roots are covered in warty growths.
  The growths surround pores that take in oxygen from the air  when the roots are above water.
  But the pores become useful in a quite different way  when they are submerged again.
  They allow water into the plant  but filter out 99% of the salt as it passes through.
  Any salt that gets in is pumped into a few sacrificial leaves  that turn yellow and are discarded.
  Plants can not only deal with being poisoned, parched and scorched  but they can also survive being frozen.
  In the world's northern forests,  the changing of the seasons creates its own challenges.
  As summer moves to autumn,  plants prepare themselves for the toughest time of the year.
  Broad-leaved trees unveil what seems to us a colourful spectacle.
  But for these plants, it's the beginning of a series  of urgent and drastic survival strategies to cope with the coming cold.
  They begin by pulling all the water and nutrients within their leaves  back into the trunk.
  The last rays of useful sunlight are channelled  into making a sugary antifreeze that will protect the body of the tree.
  The green pigment, chlorophyll, disappears,  leaving purples, reds, oranges and yellows.
  Finally, the leaves die and the trees discard them.
  As temperatures drop below freezing,  the plants of broad-leaved forests settle down to hibernate until spring.
  Pine trees can survive much colder conditions.
  They have antifreeze in the leaves themselves  that means that they can keep them all winter.
  The needle-like leaves also have a thick, waxy coating  that limits any water loss through pores.
  The winters here are long and hard.
  The trees have to survive temperatures of down to minus 40 centigrade  for five months.
  But one pine tree is capable of surviving even harsher conditions.
  These pines live at the limit of life,  above 3,000 metres in the mountains of western America.
  Almost continuous freezing temperatures and savage winds make life so tough  that these bristlecones only manage to grow for six weeks of the year.
  Everything is about conserving energy.
  They hardly ever shed their needles, which can last more than 30 years.
  After centuries of being blasted by storms,  a full-grown tree still survives with only a strip of bark a few inches wide.
  These trees live life at such a slow pace  that they can reach great age.
  Some are over 5,000 years old.
  It's been said of the bristlecones  that to live here is to take a very long time to die.
  As the northern spring approaches,  the warming temperatures and increased day length release the land from winter.
  Plants that have lain dormant begin to grow again.
  These have overwintered  buried in the mud at the bottom of this frozen lake.
  The retreating ice allows the water to warm,  and this white water lily to flourish for another season.
  And as all the trees come out of their winter rest,  the vivid green of new leaves returns to the land.
  From the frozen north to the southern deserts,  the spring bloom symbolises the success of plants  in surviving against the odds.
  But the most successful type of flowering plant  is one that makes up 20% of all plant life on the planet  grass.
  There are 10,000 different species.
  Today, they form the diet of many thousands of different animals.
  And a few grasses particularly rich in nutrients  have developed a relationship with one animal,  and together the two have changed the world.
  Ten thousand years ago we humans started to cultivate rice  in order to harvest its food-rich seeds.
  Now half of the world's population depends on it.
  But there is one other grass that has spread even further across the planet  due to its relationship with humans,  wheat.
  It underpinned the development of Western civilisation.
  Today, it covers more of the land than any other kind of plant.
  Plants have been residents on land longer than animals  and have had nearly half a billion years to evolve.
  During that time, they've diversified into countless forms  and have colonised every habitat.
  As well as collaborating with animals,  plants are sometimes their masters, exploiting them to their own advantage.
  Plants capture energy from the sun,  and all life on land directly or indirectly depends on them.
  So ultimately, plants fuel the diversity of life on Earth.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To see the behaviour of plants as they struggle to survive  presented a unique challenge.
  The "Plants" team had to employ many techniques,  including time-lapse and high-speed photography.
  They filmed in jungles, deserts, swamps and plains.
  But they also spent many hours shooting  in a converted barn just outside Exeter  (BEEPING)  all under the watchful eye of green-fingered cameraman Tim Shepherd.
  Filming plants in time-lapse takes so long,  and is so susceptible to changes in light levels and weather conditions,  that some key sequences had to be filmed in this studio.
  In time-lapse, a camera takes a series of pictures  over an extended period of time,  so when played back, the action appears speeded up.
  These sunflowers actually take three days to open,  but are seen opening in a matter of seconds.
  The most complex time-lapse the team attempted  showed an entire growing season in an English woodland in one continuous shot,  a shot that took two years to create.
  If you would come over here,  because I think this is going to be the spot.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the producer, Neil Lucas,  leads Tim and Mick Connaire, the graphic designer,  out to the location, he explains his idea.
  Well, this is one that I thought  - That's a lot of rock.
 - Which is just here.
  I think that'd be great to have the brambles growing along.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It will be a tracking shot through the wood  with plants growing, flowers blooming,  and the woodland coming to life over the course of a year.
  We're condensing that one year down into less than a minute.
  We're going to have to have them all coming out at the same time,  and that's going to be multiple passes, isn't it?  How long does a white foxglove take to grow?  Well, if we start with the just before the bud's about to open  and you've got the whole long spike,  from top to bottom that's probably about three weeks.
  So even if you wanted to, you couldn't shoot the plants actually here  because, I mean, three weeks,  the weather's going to change, you've got the day-night  And also just leaving the equipment here running, it's  It's not feasible, is it?  You just have to imagine the changes that would happen here in three weeks.
  - Yeah.
 - And if that was all joined together  and one frame the plant might be there  and you take a shot of it an hour later  and if the wind's blowing it's over here somewhere  and then you join those two shots together  It just wouldn't work.
  So what we've got to do is, not only have we got to  produce a move that is exactly the same, a repeatable move,  a track that can be built exactly the same again in a studio  Yeah.
  build exact models of every object in here  so we can put plants in the right places  and then time everything so they grow  just as the camera happens to be pointing at them.
  - TIM: Yes.
 - Okay.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The scale of the challenge is dawning on them.
  Months of planning lie ahead.
  The following spring, the team head back to the wood.
  With no road access, manpower is the only way  to get the tonnes of equipment into position.
  Everyone's wondering how this will turn out, including the locals.
  (DRILL WHIRRING)  Go up about an inch  It's straight now.
 We can start like that.
  The position now is 22 1556.
  I think you've done it wrong.
  WOMAN: You want to do it here? How are we going to get it done?  (WHIRRING)  That's pulled it, hang on.
 That's pulled it terribly.
  (BLEEP)  - Did that snap? - No.
  It's pulled this wheel round.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Two days of building, levelling, test runs  and even a few minor disasters,  and finally the track is ready to run.
  Okay, that's That's pretty close.
  If you move your Can you see that little bit of lichen?  Go to 8,900.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Accuracy is paramount.
  Yeah, I mean, whatever we shoot in the studio,  it's got to match this landscape exactly.
  So unless we know precisely where everything is relative to the camera,  there's no way of placing the plants in the studio in the right place.
  So we have to measure the hell out of it.
  Oh, bloody hell, it's spot on.
 Look at that.
  So, 250.
 Okay.
  And I think we've done it wrong.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Shot by shot and step by step,  the camera inches its way back up the 30-metre track.
  Well, that's working.
  ATTENBOROUGH: This is only the background shot.
  There is still a huge amount of other filming to be done.
  The track has to be rebuilt exactly as it is on location back in the studio,  a task that will take weeks to get right.
  Right in front of the tree at the end of the rock.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Using the detailed measurements taken in the wood,  the position, size and shape of every structure has to be matched precisely.
  MAN: Three or four points MAN 2: Thirty, 35  Minus 35, yeah.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The slightest discrepancy will put the team back to square one.
  Chicken wire and polystyrene form the rocks and trees of the woodland.
  Blue screen is used to cover every inch of the set  to allow the original shot to be mapped on later in graphics.
  Once built and with the plants placed in their exact locations,  filming can start.
  The stars of the show finally make an appearance.
  (SHUTTER CLICKING)  Timing is everything.
  With each plant taking up to three weeks to flower,  there's only one chance of getting it right.
  A year later and thankfully, so far all had gone to plan.
  The final stage is to bring all the pieces together seamlessly,  a challenging task for any graphic designer.
  We've got things overlapping  that wouldn't necessarily grow at the same time.
  But all the growth of each individual plant is absolutely accurate,  it's exactly what they would do, we've just seen it in a shorter space of time.
  Um, that big rock in the foreground at the end of the shot  that we wanted to try and get stuff climbing along,  well that's worked really, really well.
  This is the bramble pass here, we had to measure it so carefully  so we know exactly where these things were,  how round they were, how deep they were from the camera.
  And then when we take the blue out of that  you can see that the plants start to sit into the shot  exactly where we wanted them to be,  things just appearing from behind the tree,  crawl along the top of the rock.
 - It's fantastic.
  So here they go.
 And if I switch those off,  you can see just how neatly they slot into the shot.
  (NEIL LAUGHING)  If we play it you can see that  everything's sticking in pretty well.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Ninety-six layers, 15 tracks and two years later,  the shot is finally complete.
  A 60-second shot that proved to be one of the most complex ever attempted  in natural history filmmaking.
 
                    (ANIMALS SQUAWKING)  ATTENBOROUGH: In the great tree of life,  one branch of mammals has a particular fascination for us,  for we belong to it.
  Primates.
  Primate hands provide a firm grip  and forward-facing eyes accurately assess distance.
  Both are crucial for a lifestyle that began in the trees.
  Intelligence among primates can excel that of all other animals.
  Primates can solve difficult problems,  develop thoughts and ideas  and build long-lasting relationships.
  But most importantly,  primates remember what they learn during their lives.
  This film reveals how intelligence helps our closest relatives  to tackle the many challenges of life.
  There are more than 350 primate species on Earth.
  Since they first appeared over 65 million years ago,  these clever animals have become adapted  to an extraordinary range of habitats.
  The Awash region of southern Ethiopia.
  A harsh, remote scrubland.
  But primates have learned how to make it their home.
  Hamadryas baboons are waking up  from a night spent high on the cliffs.
  These monkeys live in groups up to 400 strong  with no single leader.
  Theirs is a very complex society made up of dozens of small harems,  each governed by a male.
  Every morning, they leave the safety of the cliffs to find food.
  Top-ranking males lead the way.
  They can be very severe with their females  if there is the slightest misdemeanour.
  (SCREECHING)  (SQUEALING)  Despite their individual strength,  hamadryas baboons prefer to travel as a troop.
  It's safer that way.
  On this particular morning,  something stops them in their tracks.
  Another troop is using these cliffs as a barracks.
  (ALL SQUEALING)  More than a thousand baboons can overnight here  and a rival faction is heading directly their way.
  In the chaos of warfare, males settle old scores.
  This is also their best chance of stealing females.
  When the fighting is over, the harems reform.
  Lead males punish any of their females who had dared to stray.
  (SQUEALING)  Strict discipline is essential if order is to be maintained.
  It's a harsh social system,  but it works for hamadryas baboons, here on these arid plains.
  In other parts of the world,  primates have had to organise their societies in a different way  to cope with different challenges.
  Mid-winter in the Japanese Alps.
  The Kamikochi Valley is the haunt of the most northerly dwelling monkeys.
  To live here, you must be able to survive temperatures  which plunge to minus 20 centigrade.
  The Japanese macaque.
  Dense, thick layers of fur  help to insulate these snow monkeys in this testing environment.
  But they still feel the cold.
  At this time of the year, food is scarce.
  But macaques are adaptable and clever.
  The troop has learnt that this river stays ice-free the year round.
  This female knows it's a good place  to gather insect larvae from under the rocks,  using her versatile hands and nimble fingers.
  In winter, this troop spends most of its time searching for food.
  The same underground forces that prevent this river from freezing  bring great comfort to others.
  The Japanese Alps were built by volcanoes.
  Many of them are still active.
  And in a region called Hell's Valley,  some snow monkeys have found the perfect winter resort.
  A thermal spa, where the water temperature  is a blissful 41 degrees centigrade.
  Everyone wants in but primates being primates,  there are poolside politics.
  (SCREECHING)  This is an exclusive, members-only club.
  Only the highest-ranking females and infants are allowed in.
  Everyone obeys this male,  who guards the pool and vets the entrants.
  These youngsters, born of the right bloodline,  don't know how privileged they are.
  Lower-ranking individuals are literally left out in the cold.
  Japanese macaque society is very divided.
  There are those that have and those that have not.
  And that is a harsh division,  because the 60 degrees that separate the steaming water  from the freezing surroundings  can make the difference between life and death.
  But by far, the majority of primate species  live in warm, tropical forests.
  Among them are the largest of all.
  Gorillas live in stable family groups  with just a single leader.
  A silverback male.
  This one, here in the Congo Basin, is the guardian of his family,  which includes five females and their infants.
  (GRUNTING)  He has the responsibility of protecting them from the dangers  that abound on the forest floor where they feed.
  To sustain his huge size, he must consume up to 30 kilos a day.
  It's mostly plant food,  but western gorillas also enjoy a sprinkling of termites.
  The youngsters need to eat far less than their father,  so they've got time on their hands.
  They like to play for the same reasons we do,  for fun.
  And it helps build long-lasting relationships.
  Their protector keeps a watchful eye on them.
  But then,  it's time for his siesta.
  (GRUNTING)  (WHOOPING IN DISTANCE)  Something shatters the peace.
  This silverback's territory is one of the best,  but it has borders with at least eight other gorilla groups.
  (DISTANT WHOOPING CONTINUES)  (CHEST-BEATING IN DISTANCE)  The sound of chest-beating  travels more than a mile through the tangled understory.
  It's a territorial drumbeat.
  Everyone must know who is boss around here.
  Other, smaller primates are rather more secretive.
  One of the most unusual is found in Sulawesi, Indonesia.
  It lives among the aerial roots of this strangler fig.
  Its ancestors were daytime hunters,  but they found that there was less competition  if they looked for food in the twilight.
  Now they only stir after dark.
  Nonetheless, there's a lot of insect food around.
  The spectral tarsier.
  Tarsiers are the only totally carnivorous primates on Earth.
  They've hardly changed in 45 million years.
  Their huge eyes can see in even the faintest light.
  These eyeballs are so wide they can't swivel in their sockets.
  Tarsiers have to rotate their heads.
  (INSECTS CHIRPING)  Their mobile ears can detect the faintest sounds.
  And their powerful legs enable them to jump 40 times their own length.
  The family group fans out to hunt.
  Prey is not hard to find.
  But the tarsiers must be watchful.
  For a primate just five inches tall,  life in the forest is full of danger.
  (SQUEAKS)  The male sounds the alarm.
  (TARSIER SQUEAKING)  And everyone retreats.
  Back in their family tree,  the senior male and female send out piercing calls.
  These calls guide any stragglers home  and there they renew the family bonds.
  Good communication  is one of the hallmarks of primate society.
  (MELODIC WHOOPING)  Few communicate more musically  than lar gibbons in the forests of Thailand.
  (WHOOPING ECHOES)  Their songs carry for many miles across the canopy,  proclaiming that this piece of forest is theirs.
  Most primates have excellent colour vision  and colour, too, can be used in communication.
  Adult Phayre's leaf monkeys might seem rather drab.
  But not so their newborn.
  Bright orange fur makes the babies very conspicuous  so the adults can easily keep an eye on them.
  Close friends and relatives  are eager to help the mother with babysitting.
  It's a good chance for the younger ones to practise parenting.
  As a result, the baby is never left on its own for long.
  When it's a few months old and more independent,  it will turn the colour of its mother  and blend in with the group.
  But until then, it can't be ignored.
  Smell is of particular importance  to the primates that live in Madagascar,  the lemurs.
  They have pointed snouts and wet noses.
  These are ring-tail lemurs.
  (SNIFFING)  The males have sharp pads on their wrists  with which they scratch the trunks of young trees.
  Glands on their wrists  impregnate the cut bark with a pungent smell  that acts as a territorial marker.
  Females make smelly marks in their own way.
  This one's scent carries another signal as well as the territorial one.
  It tells males that she is coming into heat.
  But she will only be sexually receptive for 24 hours or less.
  So tensions run high among the males.
  (SQUEAKING)  Amid the commotion, some males sneak off.
  They have anointed their tails with scent  and waft it towards her  in an attempt to persuade her to mate.
  She's ready  but fussy.
  This male adds more of his wrist gland perfume to his tail.
  It seems to work, for they leave the party together.
  And he wafts his way to victory.
  A willingness to mate is a relatively straightforward message.
  But primates are capable of much more complex communication.
  It starts between a mother and her baby.
  The rainforests of Sumatra.
  This female orang-utan is 42 years old.
  Her third child, her six-year-old daughter,  is still with her.
  Orangs look after their children  for longer than any other primate except ourselves.
  It will take her nine years to teach her youngster  everything she needs to know about this complex treetop world.
  She must learn how to collect ants and termites.
  How to identify at least 200 kinds of edible plants  and how to avoid the poisonous ones.
  And how to judge when fruit, like this durian, has ripened to perfection.
  A child must be able to judge which branches can carry her weight.
  And which insect nests are safe to raid.
  Building up a complete guide to the foods of the forest is a long process.
  Her lessons, of course, aren't limited to food.
  There are other crucial skills she must learn  if she is to survive in the treetops.
  Building a secure nest in which to spend the night, for example,  takes years of practice.
  And this is, of course, a rainforest.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  So all orangs must learn how to make a shelter early in their lives.
  It rains almost every day,  so this six-year-old has already had plenty of practice.
  She might live to be 50 years old.
  And if she too becomes a mother,  she'll pass on all this expertise to her own children.
  Remembering your lessons is a vital part of primate life.
  It's not just learning how to exploit your environment,  just as important is knowing when to do so.
  This is Africa's Cape Peninsula.
  It's the furthest south that monkeys have managed to settle.
  There's a wide range of plant food here  but because the soil is so poor in nutrients,  chacma baboons find it difficult to get the range of sustenance they need,  however much they eat.
  So they have had to become quite adventurous in what they will tackle.
  The waters around the Cape are among the richest in the world.
  And the wily baboons have become tidal experts.
  If you rely on the tides to expose your food,  you have to work to fairly tight schedules.
  Every two weeks, on the lowest spring tide,  there's a chance to collect something really special.
  What they've been waiting for is hidden among the fronds of seaweed.
  Shark eggs.
  Each one is only a tiny mouthful  but there are lots of them and they're so nutritious,  it's worth the trouble.
  But the baboons can't stay long.
 The tide is turning.
  So now they switch their attention to the main course of the day, mussels.
  This delicacy is exposed every day by every tide.
  Baboons have powerful jaws and huge canines,  ideal for cracking shells.
  Timing is an essential skill  if you're to harvest all the food that becomes available  at one time or another around a coast.
  Some foods, however, are only available to those who have skilful hands  and sharp intelligence.
  On the coast of Costa Rica, among the mangroves,  live some of the most intelligent monkeys  in the whole of the Americas.
  White-faced capuchins.
  They too have learnt to work the tides.
  They are after clams.
  But capuchins are quite small  and don't have the brawn to open such shellfish.
  But they do have the brain.
  And they've devised an ingenious way to solve the problem.
  They hammer the clams.
  They're not trying to crack the shells,  all this pounding and rolling has another purpose,  to tire the muscle with which the clam is holding itself shut.
  (SPLASHING)  (SHELL CRACKING)  Eventually, the clam can hold out no longer  and the capuchin gets its reward.
  (INSECT BUZZING)  Trial and error  may have been sufficient to solve this particular problem.
  But one of their cousins in Brazil has taken things a step further.
  Brown-tufted capuchins  combine manual dexterity with considerable intelligence.
  And they have learned to use tools,  hammerstones with which to open palm nuts.
  Some of the stones are nearly half the weight of the monkey.
  Without a tool, opening these nuts would be an impossible task.
  Tool-using was a major breakthrough in primate evolution.
  And nowhere is it more convincingly displayed  than here in the forest of Bossou in Guinea, West Africa.
  (WHOOPING)  (SCREECHING)  Chimpanzees in this small community of 13 individuals  use tools in a variety of ways.
  The most delicate is the way they use a twig or a leaf stem to dip for ants.
  Some of their skills are unique to this particular group.
  One of these involves stripping a palm leaf frond  and using it like a pestle to mash up the nutritious palm heart.
  This four-year-old is learning fast.
 She needs to.
  If chimpanzees haven't learnt particular skills by the age of eight,  they never seem able to acquire them.
  The most impressive skill of all, which involves nimble fingers,  hand-eye coordination and intelligence, is nut-cracking.
  Chimpanzees have gone a stage further than capuchins.
  They have learned how to carefully position the nut on an anvil  and to judge how much force to use  in order to crack the shell but not smash the kernel to pieces.
  Their use of tools is both efficient and precise.
  This 11-year-old female has an anvil but can't find a hammer.
  She approaches a male to see if he will lend her his.
  He obliges.
  Chimpanzees can show great kindness and compassion.
  Sharing,  experimenting,  empathy,  planning,  intelligence,  teaching  and learning.
  Behaviour so characteristic of us higher primates.
  We are the most inventive and innovative of all primates,  just one branch of a large and extended family,  a family which has refined the ability  to develop and pass on individual learning  to the next generation.
  A family which is built on strong bonds between mother and baby.
  A family with which we share so much.
  To film the very best primate behaviour,  the Life team had to use all their primate ingenuity and adaptability.
  And in doing so, they discovered an extraordinary affinity  with our extended family.
  Especially with the great ape  with whom we share almost 99% of our genes,  the chimpanzee.
  He was completely asleep just then,  he was just rocking to the side as if he might just fall off the branch.
  You could see his lips were twitching like he was in a deep dream.
  It was really beautiful.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Chimpanzees are our closest relatives.
  Justine Evans spent almost a month with them  in the forests of Guinea to film their use of tools.
  The chimps have disappeared off down there,  they're going to cross over into another area of forest  and hopefully start using some tools.
  Go and use tools, that's what we're here for.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Chimpanzees have to accept you.
  If they don't want to be filmed, they'll simply disappear.
  Justine needed the expert guidance of Tatyana Humle,  a primatologist who's spent more than 10 years  studying these individuals.
  So, when we see them, always keep calm  and don't stare at them straight into the eyes.
  EVANS: Have you ever had problems  with them coming right up and being aggressive?  No, never, never.
 I mean, it's pretty rare, so  I don't know what to expect, 'cause I've never seen them in the wild before.
  - So it's a first for me.
 - Okay.
  HUMLE: Just always stay calm and if one of them walks by really close  - Yeah.
 - just ignore them.
  One particularly young male might throw sticks.
  Ignore him as well, it's like, he's like a kid.
  - Right.
 - He just wants attention,  so he'll just keep doing it.
  We've got to put these face masks on,  in case we pass on any infectious diseases.
  Quite a few chimps have died in the past from respiratory diseases  in other study sites, so it's very important.
  (CHIMPANZEES SCREECHING)  That's Gigi.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Justine was finding her way with the chimps.
  But it would take time.
  It's never easy anticipating their behaviour.
  Trying to get ready really quickly  because we're expecting some chimps to come down  the path straight ahead of me.
  It would be lovely if they emerge out into this clearing.
  'Cause it's really difficult to see through all this foliage.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Tatyana and her team were invaluable.
  They introduced Justine to the chimps' different habits and characters.
  (CHIMPANZEES HOOTING)  Soon the natural inquisitiveness of the chimps  overcame any worries they might have had of Justine.
  In fact, they seemed fascinated by her and the tools of her trade.
  But it was their use of tools that Justine was here to film.
  And this was her first good opportunity.
  EV ANS: As I filmed them fishing for ants,  I was amazed by their dexterity.
  But holding focus in such low light  really tested my own coordination to the limit.
  - She's just moving away.
 - HUMLE: She's moving.
  It's been all go today.
  It's not over yet.
 If we can get out of here,  into a more open area,  we'll actually have enough light to film by, 'cause the sun's still up.
  But I don't know.
  (CHIMPANZEES CHATTERING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Although Justine's main goal was to film tool use,  there was another piece of behaviour she really wanted to capture.
  Buttress root drumming had never been filmed here before,  but she was always just a bit too late.
  Back at yet another buttress  in the hope that we might get some sort of buttress drumming.
  But it's started raining, which is an absolute pain.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It's a waiting game.
  Just staking out a couple of really big trees  that have got very large buttress roots,  in the hope that a male will come down and drum on them.
  The drumming always happens somewhere else.
  And apparently, it's usually the males that sort of sneak off to go and do it.
  It feels like a bit of a long shot at the moment.
  I have to have some patience.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The thing about chimps is that, like most primates,  you can't always predict what they're going to do,  when they're going to do it or where.
  You've just got to keep with them.
  A different type of sound brought Justine back to her main mission.
  (CRACKING)  (WHISPERING) Slowly.
 This way.
  Nut-cracking.
  This was the key sequence Justine was here to film.
  EV ANS: Filming the chimps using tools  made me realise just how close to them we are.
  I felt so similar to them.
  By the end of our filming trip,  I was able to recognise most of the individuals in the group  and had begun to understand their different personalities.
  For me, the most poignant moment of all  was when the male the scientist called Play  lent a female his tools.
  I know that primates are very social animals  but seeing this act of generosity was something I'll never forget.
  (DRUMMING)  (CHIMPANZEES SCREECHING)  EVANS: God! Watch it!  Just before we left, the chimpanzees finally put on the display  that I'd been hoping for.
  (SCREECHING)  ATTENBOROUGH: In the great tree of life, we and chimpanzees  went our separate ways about six million years ago,  but they remain our closest living relatives.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun  drives the seasons, transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  Here in the Arctic each summer, the sun begins to melt the winter ice.
  Nearly three million square miles of ice will disappear,  opening up a narrow window of opportunity for millions of animals.
  For many, it's their best chance to feed and breed.
  But for polar bears, it's the hardest time of the year.
  They have to survive the greatest seasonal change on the planet.
  Winter in the Arctic.
  The northern lights flicker across the sky.
  It's a land of continuous night  where temperatures plummet to minus 40.
  Polar bears are in their element,  hunting for seals on the frozen sea.
  But the long night is coming to an end.
  In February the sun rises  for the first time in four months.
  In the coming weeks the strength of the sun  will power an enormous change.
  But for now its rays offer only a little warmth.
  Despite the sun's return, six million square miles of the planet's far north  is still cloaked in ice.
  Deep snow covers the mountains.
  Even the sea is frozen solid, many metres deep.
  Groups of ringed seals haul out through holes in the ice  to bask in the weak sunlight.
  (YELPING)  But they are vulnerable and have to keep a lookout.
  With the sea still frozen, it's easier for predators to get close,  and the seal's greatest enemy is the polar bear.
  A mother bear and her four-month-old cub are hunting.
  Seals make up most of the bear's diet,  and to find them she must lead her youngster out onto the ice  for the first time.
  Scientists, looking at how a changing climate is affecting bears,  have fitted the female with a radio collar.
  The ice here is thinner,  and she must spread her weight to avoid breaking through.
  For her cub, it's all just a game.
  By sticking close to Mum, he'll learn how she hunts for seals,  a critical lesson for his future survival.
  At this time of year the frozen Arctic is empty of life  and only a few hardy residents can survive.
  For a female arctic fox, the winter has been a time of hunger.
  Food is scarce and she's had to wander far and wide,  scavenging from the remains of bear kills.
  (YELPING)  But her fortunes are changing.
  A dead reindeer is a lucky find.
  If no other scavengers come along,  this could sustain her for the rest of the winter.
  With the sea frozen, polar bears are busy hunting.
  This bear has caught a seal.
  He waited for it to surface through a hole in the ice  and his patience has been rewarded.
  He must catch a seal about once a week, and this is the best hunting season.
  As long as there is sea ice the bears won't go hungry,  as walking on the ice is the easiest way for a bear to get close to a seal.
  But the ice will soon start to break up and hunting will get harder.
  The calories the bear takes in now  will have to see him through hard times ahead.
  For polar bears it's the survival of the fattest.
  At this time of year there are still only five hours of daylight.
  But as the sun rises higher, each day lasts 40 minutes longer.
  It's March, and with increasing sunlight  the first in a huge wave of migrants are arriving.
  Millions of seabirds are travelling north to reach the frozen coast.
  Huge flocks of little auks and guillemots  fly across many miles of ice from the nearest open water.
  Their destination is the still-frozen sea cliffs.
  It's an inhospitable place,  but in a few weeks everything here will change.
  It pays to be early, even though the snow has yet to melt.
  The first arrivals get the best nesting ledges and a head start.
  (SQUAWKING)  They have just 50 days from laying their eggs to raise their chicks.
  (SQUAWKING)  The Arctic's silent wilderness is coming to life.
  It's three months since the sun's return and its power is growing daily.
  The air temperature rises slowly  and once above zero, at long last, the melt begins.
  Melting snow feeds freshwater streams which pour off the land.
  In just a few short days, the melt unveils a whole new landscape.
  The coastal cliffs now teem with nesting seabirds,  and it's not long before they attract unwelcome attention.
  The fox's white winter coat has disappeared with the snow.
  Her new camouflage will allow her to change from scavenger to hunter.
  The short summer will be her best chance to raise a family.
  The snow may be disappearing from the land,  but the sea ice has yet to melt.
  The coastline is still locked in ice.
  The islands of the Arctic  are surrounded by thousands of miles of white frozen ocean.
  Because the sea ice is so thick, it won't begin to break up  until the temperature stays above zero for a number of days.
  Until then, few creatures can penetrate this icy barrier.
  The sun reflects from the white frozen sea,  creating a desert of icy mirage.
  The bear can still walk on the ice to hunt for seals,  but not for much longer.
  It's getting warmer by the day.
  The bear's world is about to melt away.
  It's now June and the sun beats down 24 hours a day.
  The temperature remains constant above zero degrees.
  The frozen sea begins to melt.
  Pools form across the surface, absorbing more of the sun's heat,  speeding the thaw.
  Sunlight penetrates the frozen surface,  illuminating a strange world beneath the ice.
  The frozen barrier has split.
  Mysterious voices echo against the icy ceiling.
  Giant cracks, or leads, form at weak points,  creating a pathway for new arrivals.
  Narwhal.
  Known as the arctic unicorn because of their strange spiral tusks,  narwhal are some of the most secretive and elusive animals  in the world's oceans.
  The leads provide passage for thousands of these mysterious whales.
  Each summer they travel 600 miles north,  navigating through the ice to reach rich fishing grounds.
  More whales travel along the edge of the ice where it meets the open sea,  to search for the openings of leads.
  It's a hazardous journey.
 As mammals, they need air to breath  and if the ice closes above them they could suffocate.
  They're looking for holes in the ice where they can surface.
  A single breath will last them for 1 5 minutes.
  The further they travel, the harder it becomes to find holes in the ice.
  They snatch a breath and then travel on.
  But ahead, the ice forms an impenetrable barrier.
  The narwhal use their heads and their long tusks  to break the ice and enlarge the breathing holes.
  For now they've reached a dead end and must wait.
  The ice will need to melt further if they are to continue.
  All across the Arctic the sea ice is beginning to retreat.
  The leads widen, forming tracts of open water.
  Wind and ocean currents shift the loosening ice, breaking it up.
  As the ice melts, thousands of miles of open ocean become accessible,  providing a bonanza for millions of seabirds.
  In just four weeks a colony of guillemots  can devour one and a half million tonnes of arctic fish.
  As the ice melts, their journey to their feeding grounds in the open sea  shortens by the day.
  They gather at the edge of the retreating ice  and dive to hunt for arctic cod and capelin.
  The shoals are found 80 metres down in the murky depths,  and the guillemots must hold their breath for nearly two minutes.
  With their crops stuffed with fish, they return to the colony  to feed their hungry youngsters.
  (YELPING)  With 24 hours of daylight, they go on fishing around the clock.
  Warmed by the sun and driven by winds and currents,  the sea ice is now fragmenting.
  That is a big problem if you need the ice to hunt from.
  A polar bear can smell a seal from over a mile away.
  (SNIFFS)  But the prey he depends on is hard to find  in this constantly moving landscape.
  He must take to the water to navigate through the drifting maze of ice.
  Bears are excellent swimmers, but he's no match for a seal.
  As the ice melts, finding seals gets harder  and with more open water, it's easier for a seal to escape.
  The melt has caused a shift in power.
  Now it's ''advantage seal''.
  The bear's chance has slipped away, and his hunger grows.
  The ice barrier broken,  strange marine visitors begin to arrive.
  They've swum 600 miles to get here, and with the ice gone  they can make their way into the shallows of freshwater estuaries.
  (CLICKING)  Beluga whales.
  As more and more belugas arrive,  a strange annual ritual begins.
  For belugas, this is a very special event.
  The violent thrashing against the river bed loosens their year-old skin  and rids them of unwelcome parasites  they may have picked up on their journey.
  In freshwater, warmed by the strengthening sun  and with the smooth pebbles in the shallows to rub against,  the whales whistle with pleasure.
  (ALL WHISTLING)  But the ice-free summer will be short.
  The whales can only enjoy their arctic spa for two weeks.
  Soon the belugas must leave the shallows  and make the most of what's left of the summer  to hunt the shoals of arctic fish.
  It's early July,  and at the bird cliff the fox has caught a nesting fulmar.
  She has a family now, eight tiny mouths to feed,  and one bird is not enough to go round.
  The cubs bicker over their dinner.
  They're only three weeks old and in just another two weeks  they'll have to be ready to fend for themselves.
  (YELPING)  The winter ahead will be so harsh that only two of these eight cubs  are likely to gain enough weight to survive.
  Their lives depend on every mouthful.
  (YELPING)  When food is scarce the most dominant cub will feed.
  And the smallest will go hungry.
  The seabirds have been working round the clock to keep their chicks fed  and to prepare them for the first big challenge of their lives.
  If they are to escape the winter,  they'll have to leave the cliffs right away, and get far out to sea.
  But it's only been 20 days since they hatched  and their wings are still too weak for them to fly.
  So far their feet have never left the ground  and there is only one way down to the safety of the sea,  300 metres below.
  Reluctantly, the chicks take a few nervous steps towards the edge.
  Encouraged by a gentle nudge,  he leaps into the unknown.
  Dad follows right behind him, reassuringly calling to his chick.
  (SQUAWKING)  Made it.
  The landings may not be stylish, but at least they're on target.
  (SQUAWKING)  It's easy to misjudge the distance and some fall short of the water.
  But even now, Dad sticks close by.
  He encourages his chick to take the last few steps  towards the safety of the waves.
  But some chicks land a long way from the water.
  They're sturdy enough to survive the fall,  but this is no place to be left alone.
  For the mother fox it's easy pickings.
  With so many free meals falling from the sky,  she runs from one kill to the next.
  The chicks will be jumping for only three days,  so she must make the most of this bonanza.
  The survival of her own family depends on it.
  With more chicks than she can possibly carry,  the mother fox has to be clever.
  What her family can't eat now, she buries.
  For the days ahead she'll have a well-stocked larder,  enough for all eight of her cubs.
  Their bellies now full at last, the cubs can relax in the sun.
  For the guillemot chicks that survive, the ordeal has only just begun.
  They must retreat south 600 miles, beyond the reach of winter.
  But the youngsters can't fly yet, their wings aren't strong enough.
  So, led by their parents, they'll have to swim.
  (SQUAWKING)  At the height of summer even the permanent ice caps  are touched by the power of the sun.
  Melt-water, channelled down from high on these ice caps,  pours over a precipice where the ice meets the ocean.
  Along this 200-mile wall of ice,  a thousand freshwater cascades plummet into the sea.
  As July draws on, the great melt reaches its peak.
  The greatest seasonal change on the planet has taken place.
  The sea ice that once extended all the way to the horizon  is now open ocean.
  In just three months, the sun has won its battle with the ice.
  Over two and a half million square miles of ice has melted away,  uncovering thousands of islands surrounded by open ocean.
  But in recent years, the scale of this melt has been growing.
  And for one animal this is a critical issue.
  A mother bear and her adolescent cub  rest on a fragment of sea ice.
  With the melt, they're forced to swim ever-greater distances  to hunt for seals.
  Their arctic home is increasingly vulnerable to a changing climate,  and this year there has been even less ice than normal.
  If future melts are as extreme as this one,  bears like these may starve or drown, lost at sea.
  This is one of the last pieces of ice now adrift in the open ocean.
  The polar bear's icy world has melted away.
  For many others the open water provides the greatest feast of the year.
  The narwhal have made it through the ice.
  They gather in bays where they can hunt for arctic cod and squid.
  Here they are joined by other ocean migrants.
  Bowhead whales.
  These 1 00-tonne giants feed on millions of tiny plankton  that flourish in the sunlit waters.
  Belugas have come for the rich fishing  and rest on the surface between dives.
  Even on the sea bed there is plenty on the menu.
  Two tonnes of pulsating blubber  forages for clams in the sediment.
  Walrus are year-round residents of the Arctic,  following the ebb and flow of the ice.
  In the open summer waters they can reach huge areas of the ocean floor,  rich feeding grounds for these giant seals.
  They hoover up clams with their rubbery lips.
  A single walrus can eat up to 4,000 clams in one 1 0-minute dive.
  Bellies full, they come up for air.
  With the sea ice gone, the walrus haul out on dry land to rest.
  (BELLOWING)  They're used to huddling together to keep warm,  and even now that it's 1 2 degrees above freezing,  they prefer to stick close together.
  In the warmth of the sun, the walrus begin to shed their old skin,  and they spend hours scratching.
  Some places are harder to reach than others.
  (GRUNTING)  These irritations make them bad-tempered and arguments often break out.
  (BELLOWING)  (SNORTING)  Spitting, stabbing and bellowing iron out any disagreements.
  (SNORTING)  All disputes settled, a peace of sorts returns once more.
  Digesting a belly full of clams generates a lot of wind,  making walrus colonies very fragrant places.
  (FARTING)  Fed by the abundant supply of guillemot chicks,  all eight fox cubs seem to have boundless energy.
  Soon they will be ready to face the world without their mother.
  In just five weeks she's raised her cubs,  making the most of the short summer.
  The mother fox has won her race against time.
  Between June and July, the Arctic is the land of the midnight sun.
  An empty wilderness has been transformed.
  (CHIRPING)  The once-frozen ocean is now bursting with life,  as all the animals enjoy the summer feast.
  (CLICKING)  But polar bears aren't so fortunate.
  With no sea ice to hunt on, they're now trapped on dry land.
  A hungry bear will eat any food it can get its paws on,  but for a meat-eater a few scraps of dry lichen won't go far.
  It may have been four months since his last kill  and he won't find any seals here.
  If the yearly increase in the scale of the melt continues,  more bears will starve.
  Two thirds of the world's polar bears could vanish by 2050.
  The great melt has always been difficult for bears,  but soon surviving the summer may become impossible.
  The scale of the summer melt has changed over the last 30 years.
  2007's melt broke all records.
  400,000 extra square miles of ice disappeared,  the greatest melt ever recorded.
  The latest predictions suggest that the Arctic may be entirely ice-free  in summertime within 20 to 40 years.
  By September, the sun's power begins to ebb.
  The summer comes to an end and the Arctic empties of life.
  The last seabirds begin their long journey south,  leaving only a few hardy residents behind.
  The fox cubs now face the changing season alone.
  Already, the first snow is beginning to fall.
  The full Arctic winter is just six weeks away.
  For hungry bears, six weeks may be too long to wait.
  The sea ice will not freeze properly till it reaches minus 2 degrees.
  For now, it's still too warm.
  This ice is no use to the bears.
 They can't walk on it to hunt.
  The normally unsocial bears gather in groups,  trapped on the shoreline.
  This is the time of year the male bears spar.
  (GROWLING)  Only the biggest bears have the energy reserves to fight.
  After a summer without food, the bear's systems are in low gear.
  These aerobics help warm them up,  in readiness for the winter hunting ahead.
  (GROWLING)  It's late October, but still the sea hasn't frozen.
  For every degree rise in the average temperature,  the summer melt is extended by a whole week.
  That's more bad news for polar bears.
  Smaller, younger bears don't have the energy of the big males.
  Each day they are without food, they lose nearly a kilo.
  Some have lost half of their body weight.
  These hungry bears must now rest in the snow and conserve energy.
  All they can do is wait.
  At last the wind changes,  blowing from the cold north across the sea.
  The air temperature plummets to 20 degrees below.
  It's now cold enough for ice crystals to form in the ocean.
  They knit together forming a greasy layer of surface ice.
  This thickens into plates  which bump and collide in the swell, forming pancake ice.
  These pancakes lock together to form a continuous surface.
  At long last the sea has frozen.
  Only now can the bears head out onto the sea ice to hunt for seals.
  But the new ice has a surprise in store.
  (ICE CRACKING)  This season, for the first time ever recorded,  even the winter ice is thinner.
  The ice here is too thin to climb out on  and he struggles to free himself.
  At last, safely on the firmer ice,  he rolls in the snow to dry his fur.
  In November, the sun sets over the frozen north.
  It will not appear again for four months.
  The summer melt provides opportunities for millions of animals,  but has now become a threat to the polar bear's very survival.
  This season, the bear has survived the greatest melt yet recorded  and made it through to the Arctic winter.
  The frozen Arctic sea is one of the most demanding of all environments,  and the location for a rarely seen spectacle.
  The Nature's Great Events team  wanted to film the annual migration of the elusive arctic narwhal.
  To do so, they would have to live on, dive beneath and fly over the ice  during the climax of the great melt.
  The quest for the narwhal started at the height of the melt, in July,  when the sea ice was at its most dangerous.
  This made the task of first finding the whales a tough prospect.
  This is rough ice.
 And we're stuck.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Narwhal are so elusive  and the conditions working on the ice so difficult,  that the crew allowed a month to track them down.
  The plan was to get to the edge of the ice  in the hope of finding the whales at the beginning of their migration.
  The melt was in full swing and the team were in the thick of it.
  With 24-hour sunlight, the leads along which the narwhal migrate  were getting wider every day.
  After three weeks of searching,  the whales were living up to their secretive reputation.
  The crew couldn't see the narwhal,  but there was evidence that they were not far away.
  A sensitive hydrophone enabled them to eavesdrop on the whales  under the ice.
  I am hearing what could be sedation whistles and clicks.
  So it could be narwhal.
  It's very distant and sound travels a long way under water,  so these guys are probably still far away, but it's a good sign.
 It's good.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They could hear the whales,  but would they be able to see them?  By now the cracks had opened wide enough for them to dive to search for them.
  Ice diving is dangerous at the best of times,  but in such a remote location, days away from the nearest help,  they had to be especially careful.
  Even though it was the height of the summer,  the icy sea water was still a chilly minus 1 .
6 degrees.
  So the team needed not only specialist equipment  but specialist attitude.
  You're very quiet there, Tom.
  Well, I was just thinking we don't really want the ice to close up  while we're underneath it.
  No, closing up would be a bad thing.
  -It would be a bummer.
 -Yes.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And Tom from Florida was taking no chances against the cold.
  Ah, that feels really good.
  (CHUCKLING)  Sam, we gotta do this more often.
  Wha-hey!  ATTENBOROUGH: Now they were in the whales' realm.
  A vast underworld of frigid water  enclosed beneath a ceiling of ice.
  This is a world we rarely see.
  Sinister, but at the same time uniquely beautiful.
  As the melting ice runs into the open cracks,  it creates an underwater mirage  as the layer of freshwater mixes with the denser saltwater beneath it.
  If the ice were to close in on them now they could get trapped.
  As they ventured deeper, the crew carried a lifeline to the surface  to guide them back to their opening in the ice.
  Sadly, there were no narwhal to be seen,  but it was a unique glimpse of the whale's world.
  Sometimes it's a little bit spooky to have a ceiling above your head,  and then when the tank starts breaking through a little bit  once in a while you think,  ''Is this really an intelligent thing to be doing?''  But the shot looked cool, so I think it was worth it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They had spent over a month on and under the sea ice.
  But with still no shots of narwhal, time and ice were running out.
  The edge of the ice was now only 1 5 centimetres thick,  barely enough to support the weight of a man, let alone a camera team.
  You can feel the swell just coming up underneath this ice, it's pretty trippy.
  It's just a gentle undulation all around.
  This won't be here tomorrow.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But just as the ice was getting too thin,  their effort was rewarded.
  -What do you see, Sam? -Narwhal.
  See where the five guillemots are out there on the water, six guillemots?  ATTENBOROUGH: Tom and his team had found the narwhal.
  The whales had arrived at long last.
  But sadly, the ice was now too dangerous to film from.
  If they were to stand any chance of continuing to film,  it was time to call for reinforcements.
  After being stranded for seven days due to bad weather,  the helicopter crew finally arrived, just in time.
  There was now one last chance to film the narwhal, from the air.
  Armed with an advanced aerial camera system,  they could zoom in on the action from a long distance away.
  This would enable them to find the whales  and even get close-up shots without disturbing them.
  As the ice team headed home, the helicopter team took over.
  The helicopter could only carry enough fuel for a few hours' flying,  and finding the whales in this vast landscape was a daunting task.
  But at last they caught up with the magical arctic unicorn.
  PILOT: Yeah, there they are.
 They're kind of 1 0 o'clock from me.
  Just coming under us now.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Unaware of the helicopter flying high above,  the whales carried on their journey through the ice.
  This is the first time the narwhal migration has been filmed  from this incredible aerial perspective.
  The plan had worked.
 It had taken over six weeks,  but the team had managed to film the amazing journey of the narwhal  in this most harsh and testing of landscapes.
  It was a rare and magical insight  into the life of one of our planet's most mysterious creatures.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun drives the seasons,  transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  Here on the western coast of North America  in the spring of each year,  one of the Earth's greatest travellers comes home.
  Over half a billion salmon in the Pacific Ocean  start on a 3,000-mile journey,  returning to spawn in the rivers where they were born.
  Travelling deep into the continent,  these fish will not only provide food for millions of animals,  they will also bring life  to one of the richest habitats on Earth.
  The coast of British Columbia and Alaska  is rimmed by spectacular mountains.
  Although it will be months  before the salmon enter the rivers below these frozen peaks,  one species that has spent the winter sleeping up here  is already anticipating their return.
  In January, snug in their dens,  the females have given birth  and now the family is beginning to stir.
  Grizzly bears.
  Whether the cubs will live or die depends largely on one key event,  the salmon run.
  For the next five months,  the bears will be focused on making their appointment  with the returning salmon.
  Surviving the first year is hard.
  Half of all grizzly cubs don't make it.
  Throughout Alaska and British Columbia,  thousands of bear families are emerging from their winter sleep.
  There is nothing to eat up here,  but the conditions were ideal for hibernation -  lots of snow in which to dig a den.
  To find food, mothers must lead their cubs down to the coast  where the snow will already be melting.
  But getting down can be a challenge for small cubs.
  These mountains are dangerous places.
  But ultimately, the fate of these bear families  and indeed that of all bears around the North Pacific,  depends on the salmon.
  Right now, those salmon are more than 2,000 miles away.
  After four years at sea,  half a billion Pacific salmon are going home,  back to fresh water  to lay their eggs in the rivers where they themselves were hatched.
  How the salmon manage to find their way back home  across the open ocean is still largely a mystery.
  It has only recently been discovered that a salmon's brain  contains small particles of iron that, like a compass,  help it steer the magnetic lines of the Earth,  showing them exactly where to go.
  For many of these salmon, that destination is here  along the western coast of North America in British Columbia.
  They are making their way back to their birthplace  in one of its many freshwater rivers and streams.
  Here, amongst the network of lakes and waterways,  lies the largest expanse of temperate rainforest left in the world.
  It stretches from southern British Columbia to Alaska.
  It's one of the most fertile landscapes on the planet.
  The temperate rainforest supports even more life than its tropical counterpart.
  For thousands of years, salmon have returned to this country  because of the abundance of one element: fresh water.
  This is some of the purest water in the world,  thanks to these forests.
  Where the forests are still undisturbed,  the soil, held by millions of tree roots,  filters the water, keeping the rivers flowing clean and pure.
  In May, grizzly bears come down to the coast  to find something to eat while they await the arrival of the salmon.
  This is where spring arrives first.
  The cubs, still feeding on nothing but their mother's milk,  have grown considerably.
  But it has been six months since their mother had anything to eat.
  Now they need other food  and the search for it can lead them into danger.
  Some males will try to kill cubs.
  The breeding season has begun,  and big males are here looking for females.
  (GROWLING)  But at least there is something to eat here,  even if it's only grass and sedges.
  These greens, in fact, can keep them going for months,  but they will need something more nutritious  if they are to put on enough fat  to enable them to survive the next winter.
  In some places along the coast, bears find much richer food.
  It's buried, but bears have an extremely acute sense of smell  and can sniff out a meal even if it's beneath the wet sand.
  Clams.
  It's not only bears that are drawn to the coast  in search of food.
  There are more than 2,000 grey wolves in the Great Forest.
  They leave their cubs in the tidal areas while they hunt.
  This wolf is the pups' eldest brother.
  He's baby-sitting while the adults are away hunting.
  He doesn't have any food for the cubs,  so they eat whatever they can find,  even chewing the barnacles off the rocks.
  They, like the bears, are awaiting the arrival of the salmon.
  (HOWLING)  The adults return and find an intruder.
  A hungry bear has wandered into their patch.
  (GROWLING)  Coastal wolves will often kill and eat small bears.
  But this bear is very big.
  Eventually, they decide that this one is just too big.
  By July, the bears are all getting very hungry indeed.
  And still the salmon are not here.
  And then, after two months of travelling across the open ocean,  the salmon reach the coast.
  As they near the shore, they begin to smell fresh water.
  There are thousands of rivers flowing into the sea,  and the salmon have to find the particular one  that will lead them to their birthplace.
  They have a truly extraordinary sense of smell.
  They can distinguish a single drop from their home river  amongst eight million litres of sea water.
  As they detect the waters of home, they converge into the narrow fjords,  which act as underwater corridors.
  But other creatures also know these corridors.
  Killer whales.
 They eat a lot of salmon.
  And so do Steller sea lions.
  Salmon sharks are here, too, specifically to feed on salmon.
  But there is one predator that they can never see coming.
  The bald-headed eagle.
  Once past these coastal predators,  there is little to prevent them from reaching their home river.
  It's now late July  and the salmon are poised at the edge of their inland realm.
  In the estuaries of the larger rivers,  all five species of Pacific salmon mingle together.
  Pink, chum, coho, sockeye and Chinook.
  The drive to get into the rivers is strong.
  Their eggs will only survive in fresh water.
  In late July, however, the water level is often too low  for the first salmon to enter the smaller rivers.
  That doesn't stop them trying.
  But the very water that has drawn them back home  will eventually kill them.
  As their kidneys and other organs adjust to the sudden lack of salt water,  they stop eating and even drinking.
  So the energy stored in their bodies is all they have  to power their swim upriver and spawn.
  However, the salmon in the smaller streams  have a more immediate problem.
  The low water has stopped them  before their journey upstream can even begin.
  But their coast, every year, is swept by great storms.
  In the skies above the North Pacific, a huge eddy is forming.
  It moves towards the coast and the high coastal mountains.
  The clouds are driven up and over this massive barrier,  and they drop their load of water.
  The Great Forest gets up to three metres of rainfall a year.
  Bears have thick coats  and the heavy rain doesn't seem to bother them at all.
  The steep Rocky Mountains funnel the rainwater into the rivers  and levels quickly rise.
  This is what the salmon have been waiting for.
  The first wave of travellers advance upstream.
  No sooner do they start  than they are faced with another challenge.
  But six million years of evolution have prepared the salmon well.
  Their bodies are solid muscle and perfectly streamlined.
  Clearing these falls for a salmon  is like a human being jumping over a four-storey building.
  In many of these falls, however, the salmon face more than just water.
  The bears know that this is  where they can get the first proper meal of the season.
  But it's not easy.
  There is an art to catching a leaping salmon.
  And this young bear hasn't yet acquired it.
  This is what salmon were born to do.
  They are driven to get up these rivers to their spawning grounds.
  Their parents made it up here, and nothing short of death  will stop them from repeating that journey.
  They are trying to get to the exact stretch of gravel where they hatched.
  Some lucky ones may only have to go a few miles inland.
  But others are faced with a truly daunting journey.
  The farthest that salmon have been known to swim upriver  is 2,000 miles.
  Summer rains can be short, and when they stop  the water levels in many of the rivers along the coast drop quickly.
  The first salmon in the rivers are once again trapped by shallow water.
  And worse, they're in bear country now.
  In early August, mother bears begin to patrol the rivers looking for fish.
  Like this one, they are usually skinny and starving.
  She and her cubs have eaten nothing but plants  since they emerged from their den.
  They are in desperate need of a proper meal.
  Bears of all ages and experience come to the rivers to look for salmon.
  The first fish of the season, however, are hard to catch.
  This young bear is still learning how to do it.
  Step number one is spotting a salmon.
  A higher perspective usually helps.
  In these early days, fish are few and far between.
  And when they do appear, they are moving very fast.
  The salmon also have lots of places to hide.
  The rivers are only shallow in short stretches  and they can quickly shoot across them and escape into the deep pools.
  This mother and her cubs  are going to have to wait a little longer  for the conditions to change before they can get the meals  they so badly need.
  But for the salmon,  these deep-water refuges are becoming prisons.
  It may be weeks before it rains again and they can move on.
  Their bodies are now beginning to change.
  As their sex hormones stimulate the production of eggs and sperm,  their skin changes colour.
  Some develop a humped back and a hooked nose.
  All these changes use up precious energy.
  The longer the fish wait in these pools,  the less likely they will be able  to complete the journey to their spawning grounds.
  The mother bear and her cubs, finding little in the shallows,  now try their luck in the deeper salmon-filled pools.
  The salmon are easy enough to see.
  With so many fish here,  this young bear should surely be able to catch something.
  But finding the salmon is only part of the problem.
  Bears must pin a salmon to the stream bed  in order to catch it.
  Not easy in deep water.
  Older bears know that it's almost impossible  to get a meal this way.
  But while the salmon here may be relatively safe from the bears,  they are not out of danger.
  The late summer sun is warming the water so that levels are dropping  and the amount of dissolved oxygen is decreasing.
  The time spent in these worsening conditions is beginning to show.
  The experienced bears show the youngsters what to do.
  Catching live salmon in these pools may be difficult,  but there are dead ones for the taking,  if only the bears can reach them.
  The problem is that most bears don't like to get their ears wet.
  However, the old bears know a trick or two.
  It just needs a little fancy footwork.
  This year, the water levels are particularly low  and by September, the salmon are in real trouble.
  In the confined oxygen-poor water,  there is an increased risk of parasites and infections.
  In some years, these conditions can get so bad  that most of the salmon die before they even reach the spawning grounds.
  What they need is more rain.
 And soon.
  Luckily, this year the autumn rains arrive on time.
  The salmon can set off once again.
  However, so much rain brings different challenges.
  The fish now have to battle against powerful torrents.
  But the salmon know how to turn this swift, turbulent water  to their own advantage.
  Scarcely beating their tails, they manage to propel themselves forward  by using the energy of the water,  much as a sailboat does when tacking into the wind.
  But that doesn't mean there will be no further problem  in reaching the spawning grounds.
  This is going to be the end of the road for a lot of salmon.
  These bears are really hungry.
  They haven't tasted salmon for 1 0 months  and the big males battle for the best fishing spots.
  (GROWLING)  The longer the salmon take over their journey upstream,  the weaker they become.
  And these falls present them with their biggest challenge yet.
  Although the falls aren't very tall, the bears hold the high ground.
  The salmon make short exploratory leaps to see where the bears are.
  But they don't always get it right.
  This mother bear has been waiting months for this moment.
  Competition is fierce for these first salmon,  even between a mother and her own cubs.
  More and more fish arrive at the foot of the falls.
  Eventually they have to go for it, regardless of the danger.
  But numbers are on their side.
  For every salmon that gets caught, hundreds make it past the bears.
  By early September,  the salmon have almost reached their spawning grounds,  that one particular patch of gravel where they hatched four years ago.
  The salmon have now travelled far inland  and can be found from California to the Arctic Ocean,  across a fifth of the entire continent of North America.
  But the journey has taken a heavy toll.
  For every thousand that hatched, only four manage to return.
  And even for those salmon that have made it back,  there are still more dangers.
  They have finally reached the end of their road  and are so tired and battered that they are easy prey.
  The advantage is fully to the bears now.
  The bears are spoiled for choice.
  In the best spawning areas,  there are thousands of salmon in every mile of river.
  The bears here will gorge themselves for the next two months  and the mothers with their cubs can now gain the weight they will need  if they are to make it through the coming winter.
  The salmon are so abundant that even the little cub is having a go.
  He has caught a female pink, the smallest of the salmon species.
  He is already learning the skills he will need to survive as an adult.
  But he's got a little way to go yet.
  Although the salmon are now at the mercy of the bears,  they will not leave this place.
  Their nature impels them to lay their eggs  where they themselves were born.
  Even though the bears eat their fill,  there are so many salmon that most will survive to spawn.
  The sockeye salmon's brilliant colour signals that they are ready to breed.
  Males battle with each other for position behind the females.
  The female digs out a shallow scoop as a nest.
  The male nestles up against the female, stimulating her to release her eggs.
  When she's ready, she lowers herself over the nest.
  She begins to turn out her eggs  and the male releases a cloud of sperm into the water.
  These salmon are the lottery winners,  the lucky ones that have succeeded in returning here to spawn.
  But there are enough of them to seed the next generation.
  The spawning season is a time of extreme abundance,  for in the course of ensuring their own survival,  the salmon provide food for a horde of other creatures.
  These Bonaparte gulls are collecting one of the season's great delicacies  salmon eggs.
  For the bears, the salmon spawning season is the pinnacle of the year.
  But for the salmon,  it's the pinnacle of their entire lives.
  All that have reached it  will end their days in the very place where they began them.
  The wear and tear of their long journey is now showing.
  Their bodies have been deteriorating for weeks  and with this last act of reproduction, they are finally spent.
  But even in death,  the salmon continue to benefit the animals of the forest.
  The mother and her cubs will continue to fatten themselves on the carcasses  until they are ready to head back up the mountain  to den in November.
  Why Pacific salmon have to die after they reproduce  is not clearly understood.
  Atlantic salmon don't.
 They return year after year to spawn.
  But the Pacific salmons' decaying bodies nourish the rivers,  providing abundant food for their growing eggs.
  And that is what it has been all about for the salmon.
  All their trials and tribulations have ensured that the baby salmon,  when they emerge from these beautiful orange globes,  will have everything they need to begin this incredible journey  all over again.
  But the legacy of the salmon extends far beyond the rivers and streams.
  They are at the heart of a massive network of life.
  There are more than 200 species in the Great Forest alone,  plants and insects, birds and mammals, that depend on the salmon.
  It's possible that Pacific salmon,  between their time out at sea and their time inland,  feed more life than any other animal species on the planet.
  And there is one more beneficiary of the salmon's legacy.
  The fish are a unique link between the ocean and the forest.
  Born in fresh water, they live their life in the sea  and there gather nutrients with which they build their bodies.
  Now, scattered by feeding bears and wolves,  the last bequest of these salmon is to the forest.
  Nitrogen, carbon and phosphorus that was gathered in the ocean  is now released from their decaying bodies,  providing the nutrients that enable these trees,  Sitka spruce, red cedar,  and western hemlock,  to grow to such prodigious heights.
  It is now known that 80% of the nitrogen in these coastal forests  where the salmon spawn, comes from the sea,  carried in the bodies of the returning fish.
  The trees may be growing hundreds of miles from the ocean,  but they are still nourished by its richness.
  The rivers of the Great Forest,  like the veins and arteries of an animal, carry its lifeblood,  the Pacific salmon, throughout.
  And no animal relies on them more than the grizzly bear.
  Thanks in large part to the abundance of the salmon run,  these cubs have survived their first and most difficult year.
  The bears will sleep easy each winter  as long as the Pacific salmon are able to continue their epic run.
  One of nature's great events.
  In making The Great Salmon Run,  filmmaker Jeff Turner wanted to discover exactly how grizzly bears  caught salmon underwater.
  But his quest was to take him deeper into the world of the grizzly  than he had ever imagined.
  The first challenge that Jeff and the team faced  was to get their latest high-definition camera systems  into the wilds of British Columbia.
  This is modern-day wildlife filmmaking.
  You can't go anywhere without about half a ton of gear.
  It's very discreet.
 Animals don't notice us at all.
  Jeff has more than 20 years' experience of filming grizzlies  and knows how to work with them in the wild better than anyone.
  I was just talking to Justin.
  He was telling me he just came back from a shoot in Indonesia.
  He said he had 1 5 porters.
  I think we must be doing something wrong.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Jeff knows that the only way to film wild grizzlies  is with a small crew and a very sensitive approach.
  In order to get the shots he wanted, he used a new digital camera  in a specially built underwater housing  that he could set up close to the fishing bears  without disturbing them.
  Getting the camera in place can be tricky, however.
  Experience has taught him how to put them at their ease  with just the right tone of voice.
  Hey, bear, how ya doin', hey?  I'm gonna scare some fish up there for ya.
  That's a good bear.
 I won't bother you.
 I won't be long.
  This is when you need six hands.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The wild bears seemed intrigued  by this visitor to their river.
  You guys are as excited about this as I am.
  MAN: Okay, and now to the left.
  ATTENBOROUGH: What Jeff was hoping to capture  was a shot of bears catching salmon from both above and below water.
  He needed to operate the camera from a distance  so that the bears would be so relaxed they would continue fishing.
  But that meant connecting the camera to his computer,  using fibre-optic cable.
  .
.
or if they come through here, you know, catching it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And all that cable in the river  proved too much of a temptation for one particularly mischievous young bear.
  A situation that called for some firm bear-talk from Jeff.
  Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey.
 Drop it.
 Drop that!  Yah! Yah! Yah!  You guys can't bite the cable.
  Jeez!  (JEFF SIGHS)  ATTENBOROUGH: Luckily, the camera was still working.
  But Jeff soon realised that the salmon were avoiding the shallow waters  and he wasn't getting the shots he wanted.
  The bears were being drawn to the deep pools  where the salmon were hiding out.
  He had to try a new approach.
  The water levels in the creek are low and dropping.
  It means that the salmon that are in the system now,  they're not moving.
  They're just sort of staying in the deeper pools.
  So it means that if the fish won't come to me,  I'm gonna have to go to the fish.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Since he didn't have a shaggy fur coat,  Jeff squeezed into a dry suit to protect himself against the icy water.
  The camera needed to be on the bottom of the pool,  some three metres deep.
  But getting down there in an air-filled dry suit was no easy matter.
  (CHUCKLES)  I'm bobbing.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Jeff clearly needed to put on some weight.
  I feel like I'm in some sort of old medieval movie or something.
  -MAN: Yeah? -Yeah.
  Mel Brookes or something.
 Young Frankenstein.
  Okay.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With his improvised diving belt,  he could now get down deep enough to position the camera.
  The bears were learning very quickly  that Jeff and his crew were not a threat.
  They watched him curiously as he retreated to a respectful distance  and controlled his camera from his laptop.
  What would the bears do next?  He didn't have to wait long before the first bear waded into the pool.
  But this youngster seemed totally out of his depth.
  This is really funny.
 This little guy, he doesn't know how to get down there  so he can't quite reach the bottom.
  So he is just hanging, bobbing along here.
  He's got his paw on it.
 Aw, damn it, he knocked it over,  I think he used it to stand on to kick himself off.
  (CHUCKLES)  The fish are going straight downhill.
  It's a really steep river.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It was back into the chilly water  for Jeff to realign his camera.
  Soon it was up and running again and getting some intimate shots.
  JEFF: Got a good shot of his privates there.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Although the salmon were still just out of the reach  of this persistent young bear, the camera wasn't.
  JEFF: Oh no, he's getting close to the camera.
  Be careful, bear.
 Ah, shoot!  He totally knocked it over.
  I'm going to have to go reposition that camera.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The youngster continued to cause problems.
  He kept on knocking over the camera.
  Then two bigger, more experienced bears appeared on the scene,  right in front of Jeff.
  But the remote camera was having trouble keeping up with the action.
  To discover exactly what was going on, Jeff needed a new perspective.
  These bears were so unfazed by his presence  that he decided to stay in the water  and hand-hold the camera on the end of a long pole.
  The bears were learning to trust Jeff, allowing him to get even closer.
  To get as intimate as this with wild grizzlies  is potentially extremely dangerous  and required all of Jeff's many years of experience.
  That was good.
  Okay, we've got this other guy coming out too now.
  He's gonna check it out.
 Okay, you can have a look at it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: He was now close enough to observe their technique in detail.
  This was something that Jeff had never seen before.
  By kicking the salmon into the shallows,  the more experienced bears were able to grab themselves an easy meal.
  And by hand-holding the camera, Jeff could follow the action.
  Okay, we're getting close here.
  He's coming up to you right now.
 Roll.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To get as close as this to an adult grizzly bear  is truly remarkable.
  Jeff makes it look easy,  but it takes years of experience and understanding.
  Okay, good show, guys.
 Thank you.
 That's it.
 We're done.
  Yep, time to go, that's it.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Jeff had managed to enter the bears' world, giving him  the most intimate shots of grizzlies fishing underwater ever filmed.
  He had achieved this not just by using new technology,  but through his own special understanding  of these incredible animals.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun drives the seasons,  transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  One of the most awe-inspiring events  takes place in the vast open plains of East Africa.
  Once a year, three million animals  gather in a small corner of the Serengeti.
  This is the greatest concentration of grazing animals on the planet.
  But the herds only stay for a few months  before continuing on their epic journey.
  And when the Great Migration moves on,  the predators they leave behind become suddenly vulnerable.
  How can they survive until the Great Migration returns?  The eastern edge of the Serengeti is dominated by a volcano,  known to the Maasai people as Ol Doinyo Lengai,  the Mountain of God.
  It's one of many volcanoes, that have shaped the landscape here  for millions of years, that lie along Africa's Great Rift.
  To the west lie the grasslands of the Serengeti  and a particularly fertile area known as the short-grass plains.
  For a few months each year,  hundreds of thousands of grazers cram into this corner of the Serengeti.
  And of course, wherever you find grazers,  you find predators.
  More meat-eaters hunt and scavenge on the short-grass plains  than anywhere else in Africa.
  For lions in particular, this is, for the moment, a savannah paradise.
  With so much food on offer, it's a good time to raise young cubs.
  But lions are territorial.
  Each pride only controls a small area of grassland.
  They can only hunt the animals that come into their territory.
  So, to give these cubs a good start,  they'll have to make the most of this bonanza  while it's here.
  When the great herds move on, the lions can't go with them,  and prides like this one face a stern test.
  What happens next  is a side of lion life that is rarely seen.
  It's May.
  The rains that watered the short-grass plains have moved north  and the vast herds follow, seeking out fresh green pastures.
  Wildebeest are so in tune with the seasons  that they can hear thunderstorms 30 miles away,  and they home in on the scent of wet soil  that carries the promise of fresh grass.
  Unlike lions, wildebeest are free to travel  wherever the quest for food leads them.
  This young calf is at the start of an incredible seven-month journey.
  Without rain, the grasslands behind them wither and die.
  Within weeks the short-grass plains start to turn brown.
  Within a few months, they're unrecognisable.
  90% of grazing animals have moved on.
  Not a single wildebeest remains.
  It's now August.
 With so few animals here,  the short-grass plains are no longer a great place to be a lion.
  For the lion pride living at the southern edge of these plains,  in a place known as Ndutu,  the test now is to survive until the herds return again.
  The Ndutu pride has four lionesses and seven cubs,  and already they're struggling to find enough food and water.
  The youngest are weak and underweight.
  Surrounded by other lion prides with their own territories,  the Ndutu pride must make the most of what they can find here.
  But there isn't enough food for them all.
  This male cub is not only hungry, he's sick.
  On this morning the pride is heading for a woodland  where there is more cover and more animals to hunt.
  It's a long journey for the exhausted cubs.
  For the weakest male it's a real struggle to keep up.
  He's trying, but slowly he gets left behind.
  This is a brutal world.
 The lionesses simply cannot wait.
  If they don't keep hunting and eat soon,  they, too, will become weak,  and then there'll be no hope for any of them.
  Warthogs are a valuable catch at this time of year.
  The lives of the cubs depend on a successful outcome.
  While one lioness slowly creeps forward  another approaches from cover.
  (WARTHOG GRUNTS)  It's been a while since their last kill,  and all the hungry pride pile in.
  All, that is, except one.
  A mile away, a young life is fading away.
  The kill has come too late for him.
  At less than a year old,  these cubs are still totally dependent on the lionesses.
  To survive, they must keep up.
  Only three months into the dry season,  the Ndutu pride is down to six cubs.
  Sadly, this young male will not survive.
  It's late August, and the rains are still moving north,  taking the grass and the wildebeest  even further away from the Ndutu lions.
  With no territory to enclose them,  the wildebeest can travel wherever they like.
  But a calf, just like a lion cub, still has to stick close to mum.
  The biggest danger is getting lost in the vastness of the herd  as it treks up to 30 miles a day.
  Back at Ndutu, the dry season is biting harder.
  There's little grass here, but that's not a problem for some.
  Giraffe find most of the nutrients and moisture they need in acacia leaves.
  And, like impala, they can cope well in the dry season.
  Serengeti mice positively thrive in the drier months  thanks to the abundance of seeds.
  So some of the smaller predators, like wild cats,  still find plenty of food.
  (MEOWS)  This kitten is unlikely to go hungry.
  Perhaps surprisingly, it's the creature often called the king of the beasts  that is suffering the most.
  It's early September, and on this afternoon  there are only two male cubs with the Ndutu lionesses.
  And they're little more than skin and bone.
  What's happened to the rest?  Sadly, it seems others have been left behind.
  One young female cub is just two miles away.
  She's limping and the black patches on her face  reveal that she's losing her fur.
  (WEAK ROAR)  But she hasn't given up.
 She calls for her pride.
  (DISTANT ROAR)  She's hears a faint call, and hurries towards it.
  And is reunited with one of her brothers.
  Nearby there is prey.
 But these cubs are unable to hunt.
  They are still too young.
  If they're going to survive, they must rejoin the pride.
  While she still has strength, she continues to try and make contact.
  Far away, the lionesses also call constantly.
  (GRUNTS)  And listen for their lost youngsters.
  Even a sick cub joins in the search for his sisters and brothers.
  But there are no replies.
  After an hour of calling, the lionesses can wait no longer,  they must move on.
  The pride will have to move to another part of their territory  if they are to find food.
  None of them have eaten for days  and now the chances of being reunited with the lost cubs  seems remote indeed.
  It's September, one of the driest months in Ndutu.
  The wildebeest herds are over a hundred miles away,  having followed new pastures to the northern edge of the Serengeti.
  But they have a huge challenge of their own to face.
  They must cross the Mara River.
  Over several days, the herds crowd together at the water's edge.
  The adults seem to sense a hidden danger.
  But the numbers keep piling up on the river's edge  and ultimately they face the danger together.
  The crocodiles are spoilt for choice  but they can only take one victim at a time.
  There is safety in numbers here  and most of the wildebeest make it across to the grasslands beyond.
  Back in the south, the Ndutu plains are tinder-dry.
  Seed and insect-eaters can scratch a living,  and the smaller cats like serval, that hunt them,  can still find plenty to eat.
  And a cheetah mother is managing to keep her cubs fit and healthy  on the small antelope that remain.
  It's now October, the peak of the dry season,  and the Ndutu pride are resting in the heat of the day.
  In a bizarre twist of fate, one of the two male cubs has died,  but amazingly, the lost female, with the black face patches,  has found her way back.
  She's still weak, and clearly hasn't eaten for days.
  Meanwhile, it's getting hotter.
  Just when it seems life couldn't get any worse, it does.
  Flames race across the Ndutu pride territory,  burning the last of the grass and any remaining bush cover.
  At first glance there's little left here.
  Yet animals like impala quickly return to investigate.
  The impalas' world has changed beyond recognition.
  There's nowhere left to hide.
  The Ndutu pride has also lost the cover they use for hunting.
  The young female may have survived her first fire,  but her chances of a meal have fallen even lower.
  For the cheetah family, the fire is not such bad news,  as their prey can actually become easier to find.
  The steenbok relies on blending into its surroundings and sitting still  to avoid being spotted.
  But in this emptiness, its camouflage is useless.
  It's a sitting target.
  And apparently unaware of the approaching danger.
  Larger prey, like Grant's gazelle,  are constantly on the lookout for danger,  and easily see the Ndutu pride in the distance.
  The task for the hunters now seems virtually impossible.
  But they do have one advantage.
  There are four lionesses  and they've been hunting together for years.
  It'll be hard to get close to the warthogs.
  But if they can split up and attack on two sides,  they may stand a chance.
  This is how a young lioness learns.
  As ever, teamwork is critical.
  In a well-practiced routine,  a lioness moves round to block the warthog's escape.
  As one is flushed into the open,  the flanking lioness rushes in for the kill.
  (WARTHOG SQUEALS)  Warthogs are a favourite food.
  It's a welcome feast enjoyed by all.
  At the toughest of times, the lionesses have provided for the cubs.
  But it's an unpredictable year, in more ways than one.
  For the first time in 40 years  the sleeping Mountain of God, Ol Doinyo Lengai, awakens.
  (RUMBLING)  Vast clouds of volcanic ash drift towards the short-grass plains  and the home of the Ndutu pride lions.
  Ravaged by fire, scorched by the sun,  the plains now become shrouded in a layer of ash.
  It's November, and the rains that would bring  the return of the grass and the herds are now overdue.
  The Ndutu lionesses rest in the intense heat,  and the cubs' batteries are now running very low.
  But the winds are changing,  a sign that the season is turning.
  The wildebeest seem to know what's about to happen.
  They begin heading south.
  One and a half million wildebeest  start their journey back to the short-grass plains.
  The Great Migration of the wildebeest is one of the longest treks  of any land animal on our planet.
  As they follow the rains around the Serengeti,  many will travel over a thousand miles.
  But there's no guarantee  that these wildebeest will return to the territory of the Ndutu pride.
  They will feed only where the best grasses grow.
  All that's needed now is rain.
  (THUNDERING)  For the Ndutu pride, rain brings hope.
  But how long will it take for the grass to grow  and the herds to return?  Within a matter of days,  fresh grass transforms the arid plains into the lush pastures  that will lure the herds to return.
  It's December, and the migrating herds start to arrive  at the northern boundary of the short-grass plains,  just 30 miles from the Ndutu lions.
  After seven months away the herd is returning.
  Stretching back some 25 miles,  it will take weeks for all the wildebeest to arrive.
  And nothing will stop them now.
  (ROARING)  The Mountain of God chooses this moment to throw up a column of ash  1 5,000 metres into the air.
  But the link between this ash and these herds  is more than a mere coincidence.
  For this ash is rich in minerals,  and over several million years  as volcanoes in the Great Rift have erupted,  layer upon layer of ash has fertilised the ground,  creating this uniquely fertile grassland.
  It's this that draws animals from all over the Serengeti.
  The ash also discourages the growth of trees.
  So on these plains, that might otherwise be covered in woodland,  little grows except grass.
  It's possibly the best grazing land in all of Africa.
  And probably the only place  where one and a half million wildebeest could feed together.
  In the northern half,  the short-grass plains have once again become a savannah paradise.
  The conditions are so good  that the wildebeest also use these plains for another important purpose.
  The females are carrying the next generation  and they've come here to calve.
  (GRUNTING)  It only takes seconds.
  Some calves are on their feet in just two minutes.
  Others take a little longer.
  Then they're good to go.
  Phosphorus and calcium in the volcanic ash  pass through the grass, into the mother's milk  and into the growing calves.
  Nowhere else on their epic journey  could young wildebeest get such a good start in life.
  In just two to three weeks,  over half a million wildebeest calves are born here.
  And of course, this provides an irresistible opportunity  for all of Africa's top predators.
  This is boom time for meat-eaters.
  The Ndutu lions, to the south, have yet to enjoy this feast,  but this cheetah family now has an endless supply of fresh meat.
  There is certainly enough to feed the six cubs.
  She'll make a kill every day to keep her cubs properly fed.
  And it's not just wildebeest the predators have come to eat.
  Many of Africa's antelope are here, too.
  Eland, Africa's largest.
  And they're joined by more than half a million  Thomson and Grant's gazelles.
  And 200,000 zebra.
  Just north of the Ndutu lion territory,  these lions are now lucky enough to enjoy a time of plenty.
  A favourite lion ploy is to wait by waterholes  knowing that the herd will ultimately have to drink.
  As the herds move further south,  they at last enter the homeland of the Ndutu pride.
  The question is, have the weak cubs managed to survive  to witness the great return?  The Ndutu pride is still together.
 They are healthy and strong.
  Somehow they have managed to make it through the long dry season  and the endless wait for the returning herds.
  The young male now has the beginnings of a mane.
  And though still limping,  the female has grown new fur over her black patches.
  Now at last, with endless food around them,  the lion cubs have the time and the energy to play.
  And they can relax in a way that only lions know how.
  By March, the great event on the Ndutu plains is in full swing,  and where there are kills, there are scavengers.
  (BIRDS SQUAWKING)  Vultures fly in from all over the Serengeti.
  On her own a mother cheetah has little chance  of keeping this mob off her kill.
  She may be agile, but she lacks the necessary brute force.
  Even now it's not easy raising cheetah cubs.
  Over half her kills will be stolen by thieves.
  Spotted hyenas are notorious scavengers and they arrive in force.
  (HYENAS LAUGHING)  Hyenas now become the most numerous carnivores on the Ndutu plains.
  They'll even take on a lion pride.
  As the Ndutu lions finish off a wildebeest,  the hyena clans gather around, trying to intimidate them.
  The young male cub faces up to them.
  He's finally coming of age.
  He's learning how to protect a pride.
  But this time, with their bellies full,  the pride decide the bones aren't worth the hassle.
  Well-fed at last,  the two young cubs are beginning to look more like adults.
  But it will be another six months before they can hunt on their own.
  It's April, and there's a flurry of excitement  as the wildebeest turn their attention to courting.
  Or at least the males do.
  The young bulls limber up for the rut,  when they will have to fight for the right to mate with a female.
  High spirits are infectious.
  In three months the young calves become boisterous and bounce with good health.
  These plains have been a nursery.
  But change is in the air.
  The season is turning again.
  The arrival of seed-eating quelea  is a sign that the grass on the Ndutu plains is changing.
  Once the grass flowers and sets seed,  it loses the succulent green leaves that the wildebeest prefer.
  Time for them to move on again,  to follow the distant storms that are now rumbling to the north.
  Despite the arduous journey that lies ahead,  a wildebeest calf in the Serengeti  still has a better chance of surviving its first year  than a lion cub.
  The Great Migration is leaving Ndutu,  and once again the pride will have to face life without the herds.
  A brother and sister have survived an eventful year  that has brought sickness and drought, fires and volcanic eruptions.
  Theirs is just one of countless stories  that unfold every year on the short-grass plains,  the grasslands at the centre of this great event.
  All in the shadow of the Mountain of God.
  To film intimate animal stories in the vast Serengeti  was the toughest challenge faced by the Great Migration team.
  Especially when a major part of the mission  was to follow the fortunes of a single Serengeti lion pride.
  For filmmaker Owen Newman, to tell the full story of a pride  he had to follow them before and during the annual wildebeest migration.
  The filming would take seven months -  a rather long time to be stuck in a rather small car.
  There's just one tiny space in here where I can move  and it's the bit for using these pedals, for steering with  and for being able to turn round like that and operate the camera.
  (CHUCKLES) That's the only moving space I have in here.
  So, I mean  Every day for 1 4 hours, that's it.
  But out of here is this phenomenal view on the world  and all the animals that are out there.
  I wouldn't swap it for anything.
  ATTENBOROUGH: If Owen was to stand any chance  of keeping up with his lion pride,  he would have to cover thousands of miles  alone in his cramped car.
  Owen has filmed many lion stories,  but not even he could have known how dramatic and harrowing  the story of the pride's youngest lioness would become.
  The drama started in the dry season when Owen first found the lions  known as the Ndutu pride.
  The cubs were already suffering,  and even with 20 years' experience of filming big cats,  for Owen these scenes were hard to witness.
  I was so appalled with the condition that the cubs were in.
  They were all around a year old and I'd never ever  seen lions so thin as they were.
  It was absolutely shocking.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the litter of seven cubs dwindled to only four,  the drama continued to unfold.
  Just as the dry season dragged on, they got mange,  their skin was falling apart,  the little female in particular looked as though she had no chance.
  ATTENBOROUGH: One awful day,  Owen found that more cubs had been left behind by the pride.
  The little female and a brother.
  Hungry and alone, their death seemed inevitable.
  Quite late in the afternoon, but earlier than I would have done ordinarily,  I left, 'cause it was actually getting to me so much  I couldn't stand being there.
 It was really so sad.
  I went back the next day  and there was no sign of either of the cubs  and I just assumed that probably they'd died.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Amazingly, in a dramatic twist,  the little lioness did survive  and rejoin her family.
  But when the rains came the whole pride disappeared.
  As filming resumed at the start of the wet season,  all eyes were on the lookout for the Ndutu lions.
  Although the plains were now teeming with animals,  what Owen really wanted was to find his lion cubs.
  All he could do was to sit, watch and wait.
  This is what happens for hours on end.
  Nothing.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With spotters continuing the search for the Ndutu pride,  Owen got on with filming the Great Migration of the wildebeest  and its newest recruits.
  What's really nice about the calves being born  is that for about eight months while they've been developing,  they've been carried around by the mums across the plains,  they've been stampeded by hyenas and lions,  they've criss-crossed crocodile-infested rivers,  and here they are being born to join in.
  It never fails to be a really wonderful thing to see.
  The calf's born and the mother gets up and starts licking it.
  And the little thing tries to stand up on incredibly wobbly legs,  and within two minutes  it's walking away with its mum.
  Oh, look, it's nearly found the udder.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With shots of wildebeest calving in the can,  Owen could get on with his search for the lion cubs.
  The lions' story was still hanging in the balance.
  All Owen could do was persevere with his daily filming routine.
  Do you think it's breakfast time?  That is a good cup of tea.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Another month had passed  and even with Owen's years of experience,  the fate of the Ndutu pride lions was still a mystery to him.
  To recognise them, Owen had photographs of their whisker patterns.
  They're as unique as a fingerprint.
  If only he could find them.
  (LAUGHS)  There's no peace.
 I am stalked.
  Okay, well, it's a low moment, I have to admit.
  Time seems to be dragging.
 We need to be doing something.
  We can't just be sitting here admiring every small bird that hops by.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Then one morning  a report came in from spotter Hamisi Massawe,  who had found a group of lions matching the Ndutu pride's description.
  They're over there.
  I think they're there.
 What a place to be, Hamisi.
  -And there were two cubs.
 -Yeah?  -Yeah, okay.
 -The male.
 There's no much mane.
  -On the cub? -Yeah.
  Yeah, he's just got a little line.
  -Little line.
 Yes.
 It's them.
 -Yeah.
  Finally, after months of worry and total dedication,  Owen would discover the fate of his thin female cub,  the one with the black face patches.
  Had she managed to survive?  The news was good.
  Yes, she's my favourite.
  'Cause by all rights  I think she should be dead,  from what I saw in the dry season.
 But here she is, still alive.
  Wow.
 She's still got a tiny limp on her front right foot,  but otherwise is in really good shape.
  Wow.
  They're so friendly.
  Oh, such a fantastic day.
  And they're all playing together as well and reacting,  which they never did in the dry season.
  It's absolutely wonderful.
  Ah, they've turned into proper lions.
  You can spend a long time in the Serengeti,  and they're all fantastic days, but suddenly you get a day like this  which is absolutely fantastic.
  ATTENBOROUGH: For the healthy cubs,  it was just another day in the short-grass plains.
  For Owen, a wonderful moment  within the most harrowing lion story he had ever filmed.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun drives the seasons,  transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  The most dramatic event in the world's oceans  happens off the eastern shores of South Africa.
  These cool waters create the perfect conditions  for a spectacle of epic proportions.
  And everything revolves around the humble sardine.
  Each year millions of them are swept up Africa's coast  on a desperate winter journey.
  Following them comes what will become the biggest army of predators  anywhere on the planet.
  The climax to this chase depends on many crucial elements coming together  for one brief moment in time.
  This can well claim to be the greatest ''shoal'' on Earth.
  In the deep water off the southern tip of Africa  lie the rich fishing grounds of the Agulhas Bank.
  It's home to billions of sardines.
  They live in immense shoals as defence against their many predators.
  Moving together as one in a shoal  gives an individual sardine its best chance of survival.
  Sardines are so numerous,  they're on the menu of most fish-eating predators here.
  It's summer, and the sardines are lost in the vastness of the ocean.
  The shoals are so dispersed they're hard to find.
  Common dolphins are specialist sardine hunters.
  Dolphins aren't the only ones on their trail.
  Gannets also rely on a diet of sardines.
  The best way for them to find the shoals is to follow the dolphins.
  When the fish are far out to sea,  the dolphins need great perseverance to track them down.
  The dolphins use their own form of sonar,  sending out a stream of clicks and whistles,  listening for returning echoes.
  (CLICKING)  At last they've found what they're looking for.
  Working as a team, the dolphins isolate a group of fish  and corral them into a tight ball close to the surface.
  The gannets can now make their move.
  Gannets can't dive deep,  so they must rely on dolphins to keep the sardines near the surface.
  The feeding frenzy is short-lived.
  Most of the shoal escapes to the deep and the hunters are left still hungry.
  It's December, the height of the southern summer,  and the sardines have the advantage.
  With the shoals dispersed, life is hard for all the predators.
  But in six months' time, if conditions are right,  the scene will be set for astonishing and sustained drama.
  For a few short weeks each winter,  cold ocean currents can sweep great shoals of sardines up the coast.
  Trapped close to shore within this corridor of cool water,  the fish are vulnerable and their predators will follow in droves.
  If it happens, this will be the Sardine Run,  one of nature's great events, unique to these shores of South Africa.
  But for this epic event to take place, many elements have to come together,  and with our changing climate they're less predictable every year.
  For the predators, the winter Sardine Run, if it happens,  can make the difference between life and death.
  Dolphins rely on the easy hunting during the run to wean their calves.
  But the omens aren't good.
  Last year the sardines didn't run at all.
  Gannets follow the same pattern.
 They have their chicks in summer,  so they, too, leave the nest in time for the Sardine Run.
  This is Bird Island, just off the Eastern Cape,  the biggest gannet colony in the world.
  No less than 1 00,000 breeding pairs  come here every summer to have their young.
  These incredible numbers show the wealth of life  the annual Sardine Run can support.
  They also show how many lives may be in jeopardy  if the sardines don't run.
  Right now the African summer is taking its toll.
  With temperatures soaring and no cover on these exposed islands,  the birds are in danger of overheating.
  The young are especially vulnerable.
  They have to be fed every day.
  Even with both parents taking turns, it's an exhausting task.
  In summer the sardines are a long way out to sea.
  The birds fly hundreds of miles in search of a meal.
  Once they've sighted their target, they plunge from heights of 30 metres  striking the water at 60 mph.
  Every dive subjects them to enormous forces.
  The slightest miscalculation could be fatal.
  Gannets dive no deeper than 1 0 metres,  so once again they rely on the dolphins to keep their prey near the surface.
  But with so much traffic, there's always the danger of a collision.
  This one has broken her neck.
  Her death will mean that back on the colony  her chick will probably starve.
  The rest make the long flight home with their catch.
  One partner stays on the island to guard their chick.
  The pair welcome each other with a ritualised greeting.
  They have a strong bond and many couples mate for life.
  During the hours of daylight the sardines stay deep  in an attempt to avoid their predators.
  As the sun sets, the little fish themselves can begin to feed.
  They swim upwards to sieve the water for plankton,  microscopic plants and animals.
  At daybreak they sink once more into the safety of the deep.
  It's not just dolphins and gannets that rely on sardines.
  There are other, more mysterious predators.
  The Bryde's whale hardly breaks the surface to breathe  and never so much as shows a tail fluke.
  For a 1 5-metre whale, they can vanish with remarkable ease.
  We know little about these stealthy leviathans,  other than that they are sardine-hunters, too.
  Summer is a lean time for the Bryde's whale,  as it is for all the predators.
  Sharks follow the same patterns,  tracking the shoals offshore through the summer,  waiting for the winter Sardine Run when the hunting will be easier.
  But being cold-blooded,  they don't have the high energy demands of the whales, dolphins and gannets.
  All the predators have to endure the lean months,  relying on the southern winter in June to bring a change in their fortunes.
  Now the changing seasons create a switch in the ocean currents.
  As summer gives way to autumn,  the southerly-flowing warm current weakens  and cold Antarctic water pushes further north, nearer to land.
  The sardines are carried along by these cool waters  and pushed closer to shore.
  If these ocean currents continue to change,  the Sardine Run should be only three months away.
  It's time for the gannet chicks to leave the safety of their colony.
  Parents stop feeding their young when they're three months old.
  This forces the chicks to take to the sea.
  The young have enough fat reserves to survive for just 1 0 days.
  And in this brief window,  they must learn how to fly and hunt for themselves.
  This is the most critical time in a gannet's life.
  Failure will mean starvation.
  To prepare for their maiden flight,  they test their wings and strengthen their flying muscles.
  Eventually, hunger drives them onwards and upwards.
  Some get up and away first time.
  But many don't make it past the crashing surf.
  Some bedraggled chicks struggle back to shore.
  But for others, the pounding has been too much.
  Fewer than half of all the chicks on this colony  survive their first three months of life.
  The coast of South Africa is an unforgiving place.
  The baby dolphins are still dependent on their mothers.
  They suckle for six months before they, like the young gannets,  have to start fishing for themselves.
  There is such an abundance of fish during the Sardine Run,  that even the calves can catch some and so begin to learn their hunting skills.
  But the Sardine Run might not even happen this year.
  For now the dolphins will have to continue to scour the vast ocean.
  Back at the coast, other youngsters are getting ready to go it alone.
  Cape fur seals are also waiting for the sardines to come close to shore.
  But seals have a broad diet,  so they can make the most of other feeding opportunities  until the sardines come within range.
  Young seals are forced from the colony by the dominant males.
  Once they're cast out, the adolescents roam the coastline looking for food.
  They won't turn their noses up at a plump young gannet.
  Hungry seals patrol the surf,  ready to pick off any birds that don't get airborne straight away.
  When the wind is light, the gannet chicks are stuck on the island.
  Surely they're safe here?  But even on land the seal is surprisingly fast on his flippers.
  In this one season, on this one colony alone,  seals kill up to1 0,000 fledglings.
  And, as ever, it all comes down to sardines,  for the seals are only after the fish within the stomach of their victims.
  For the young birds who do make it past the seals,  there are fresh challenges.
  Learning the skills of their parents.
  First they have to find their quarry, the sardine shoals.
  And the best way to do that is to follow the expert trackers.
  They're hungry.
 It's been days since their parents last fed them.
  As the search goes on,  the chicks are learning the most sophisticated  survival technique of all -  how to harness the expertise of another species.
  After a long search,  the dolphins have found a small school of fish.
  They drive the sardines to the surface and within range of the young gannets.
  Now, quickly, they have to learn the art of the plunge-dive.
  But there's a problem.
  The opportunistic seals have found the fish, too.
  The young gannets have a daunting choice.
  To risk diving with the enemy or to starve.
  If they don't take their chances soon, there will be nothing left.
  They're in luck.
  With sardines back on the menu, the seals ignore the gannets.
  As ever, the dolphins have done the hard work  of rounding up the fish,  and now a host of other predators take advantage.
  With the shoal diminishing by the second, competition is fierce.
  But there is still time for a mighty intruder.
  The Bryde's whale devours the entire ball of fish.
  Until the Sardine Run starts in earnest,  these minor skirmishes are mere preludes to the main event.
  But winter is finally on the way.
 The cold current pushes further north.
  This cool water forces its way up the coast.
  If it continues to flow northwards,  it will carry great shoals of sardines with it.
  The predators begin to gather, in anticipation of a feast.
  Sardines can't tolerate water above 20 degrees centigrade.
  So unless the cool water penetrates further up the coast,  the fish won't move and the annual run just won't happen.
  Perhaps climate change has made its mark here.
  The waters have stayed too warm, stalling the movement of fish.
  There hasn't been a sardine run for the past two years.
  The entire fleet is becalmed.
  A winter storm rolls in from the Antarctic,  battering the Cape, bringing cold water.
  Driven by their hunger,  gannets still try to hunt in these dangerous conditions.
  In fact, this wild weather  is just what all the predators have been waiting for.
  For them, it's a perfect storm.
  It has pushed a narrow tongue of colder water up the coast.
  This chilly current carries wave after wave of sardines with it.
  Hemmed in by the land on one side and warm water on the other,  the sardines are being drawn into a trap.
  Nature is playing a cruel trick on these unfortunate fish,  as they'll get no benefit from their mass voyage.
  They're slaves to the cold ocean currents.
  More than 500 million fish are swimming towards disaster,  and yet this is just a tenth of the sardine population.
  The run is on.
  Ahead, an ambush is being prepared.
  As the seas begin to calm,  the dolphins relocate the sardine shoals.
  As they track up the coast, the pods unite, combining forces.
  They form super-pods of incredible numbers,  up to 5,000 dolphins in one group.
  This is fast becoming one of the biggest groups of predators  anywhere on the planet.
  The attackers spread out into wide hunting lines,  stretching up to a mile across.
  Other divisions follow on, as ever tracking the dolphins.
  Shadowing them all, the Bryde's whale.
  They're all heading in one direction,  towards a place known as Waterfall Bluff.
  It's an arc in the coastline which interrupts the flow of currents,  trapping the water in a swirling eddy.
  And the dolphins know that the massive shoals  often get caught in this bottleneck.
  But these sardines have managed to avoid the trap.
  The first shoals have been carried well to the north of Waterfall Bluff,  ahead of the dolphin super-pods.
  As the cool water is squeezed into an ever thinner band  closer to the shore,  the shoals are forced up into the shallows.
  Only now do we get a real sense of the sheer volume of fish.
  This one shoal stretches along the coast for 1 5 miles.
  The water is 1 5 metres deep  and packed with sardines from top to bottom.
  There could be more than 1 00 million fish in this single shoal alone.
  As long as the sardines are in such shallow water,  they're beyond the reach of the dolphins,  who won't follow for fear of stranding.
  And the gannets can't risk diving into such shallow water either.
  But there are hunters who can follow.
  And they've arrived in their thousands.
  Sharks.
  Dusky, copper and ragged-tooth sharks encircle the sardines.
  But for the little fish, there's safety in such vast numbers.
  The sheer volume of sardines, the way they twist and turn in harmony,  confuses the sharks.
  Without dolphins to round up the fish,  these sharks have to find their own solution.
  They try to trap the fish against the water's surface.
  But this boiling water is mostly sardines escaping.
  Few are actually eaten.
  Tiny fish triumph over the marauding sharks.
  The sharks continue to harry the shoal, pushing it ever northwards.
  Back at Waterfall Bluff, the dolphins and gannets  are waiting for the next pulse of sardines  to come up from the south.
  If there is another shoal,  this kink in the coastline is the perfect place to ambush them.
  But if the fish don't come,  these hungry predators face a long journey all the way back to the Cape.
  To the north, the survivors of the shark attack  are nearing the end of their run at the beaches around Durban.
  These seem like the lucky ones.
  On their epic journey they've evaded an army of hunters.
  But one final, unexpected predator lies in wait.
  Fishermen can only net the sardines once they've swum this far north,  within easy reach of the shore.
  Last year no sardines were seen on this coast.
  So far this winter, the fishermen have landed only 50 tonnes,  barely a tenth of what they'd expect in a good year.
  That's how unpredictable the Sardine Run has become.
  After such a long and hazardous voyage,  it's a sad end for these sardines.
  At Waterfall Bluff, the dolphins and gannets have had to bide their time.
  After missing the first shoal,  these predators are relying on the currents  to sweep another big pulse of sardines up the coast.
  Now another great shoal is on the way.
  And it's heading straight for Waterfall Bluff.
  Trapped between the shore on one side and the warm water on the other,  these fish are swimming straight towards the enemy.
  The sardines fall back on their instinctive defence,  swarming into a huge mass that confuses a predator.
  But the dolphins have a strategy that turns this to their advantage.
  Working together, they separate off a pocket of sardines.
  In smaller numbers the fishes shoaling defence now works against them.
  The dolphins corral the bait ball and herd it to the surface.
  This is what the other hunters have been waiting for.
  Now the sardines are within range of the gannets.
  The bait balls form and reform,  seldom lasting longer than a few minutes each.
  The sharks pile in, taking advantage of the dolphins' hard work.
  The predators ignore each other.
 There's only one victim here -  the millions of tasty little fish they've been stalking for so long.
  Young gannets join the frenzy.
  In just six months they have become superb aerial hunters.
  Time after time, the dolphins round up another shoal for destruction.
  Frantically, the little fish try to get away  from the seething surface of the water to dive beyond the range of the gannets.
  Now, something truly astonishing happens.
  Diving takes the gannets down to 1 0 metres.
  Then the aerial squadrons become shoals of swimmers  as they pursue the fish down to 20 metres.
  Sardines join with their predators  in a beautiful yet macabre underwater ballet.
  There's little chance of escape for these fish.
  The stage is set for the biggest predator of all.
  The Bryde's whale takes in 1 0,000 fish in one giant mouthful.
  But this time around, there are plenty of sardines for all.
  Each hunter amongst these millions plays its part in the drama  and each is dependent upon the other.
  The annual spectacle of the Sardine Run  is undoubtedly the greatest gathering of predators anywhere on the planet.
  It's surely one of nature's great events.
  Then, almost as quickly as it began,  it's over.
  As the brief winter comes to an end,  warm currents flowing south displace the corridor of cool water.
  Despite the massacre,  more than half of all the sardines swept up on the great run, survive.
  As the currents switch,  the fortunate ones make good their escape.
  From here, they'll follow deep water currents,  hitching a ride back to the cool waters of the Cape.
  The Bryde's whale melts away to resume its secretive life  somewhere out in the big blue.
  The dolphin super-pods break up and begin their long trek back to the Cape.
  Gannets, too, head south.
  As Waterfall Bluff falls quiet once more,  no one can say whether this spectacular event  will be repeated here in years to come.
  The Sardine Run may be unique to the coast of South Africa,  but it's a vivid reminder of the riches that our oceans can still support.
  The amazing bait balls that characterise the Sardine Run are short-lived  and very hard to find.
  Filming them was to turn into a two-year mission  for the underwater team.
  To film the feeding frenzies,  the team would need three key elements to come together -  a huge shoal of sardines, the right mix of predators  and water clear enough to be able to see the action.
  The most important element to start with was being able to see underwater.
  And at the beginning of the first the season  it wasn't looking good for underwater cameraman Didier Noirot.
  It looks like dirty water, but I'm going to check anyway to be sure.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Didier was Jacques Cousteau's underwater cameraman  for more than a decade.
  He knows that the Sardine Run is very unpredictable  and that some years it never happens at all.
  The predators were gathering,  but the ocean currents weren't bringing any sardines.
  It wasn't a good start to the first season's filming.
  MAN: What's it like?  No vis.
 No visibility.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And the murky water held further risks.
  Poor vis you don't see what's coming,  so it's not that we're scared of all the sharks,  but we notice that accidents, people get bitten always in dirty water.
  So why should we take the risk?  We go in dirty water to make bad pictures  and get bitten by sharks.
  It's not worth.
  I'd rather stay dry!  ATTENBOROUGH: After 20 days at sea with no sign of sardines,  the crew kept themselves busy with some sound recording for the film.
  I didn't take my mask, you see, so I don't intend to dive.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team developed some ingenious techniques  to get microphones close to the dolphins and gannets  that were also waiting for the sardines.
  So what we're doing today is trying a radio mic and a Frenchman.
  The problem is he doesn't know when to stop talking.
  It's the quietest we've had him for days, but he still rabbits on.
  ATTENBOROUGH: No one was prepared for what happened next.
  The thing is these aren't waterproof at all.
  -Shark, shark! Quick, quick! -Go, go!  Quick, quick!  He bit me.
 Big copper.
  It's late, it's murky water.
 We cannot stay there too long, you see.
  -Did he come right underneath you? -No, he bit my fins.
 I kick.
  -Seriously? -Yeah, I told you  there are sharks, so come and fetch me.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The sharks were definitely about,  but the first season ended without Didier seeing any sardines.
  At the beginning of the second year the pressure was on.
  But things were looking up.
  With the help of aerial spotter Eric Webber,  Didier and the team could search a greater stretch of ocean.
  For the first time in three years,  a huge slick of fish had been swept up the coast.
  The Sardine Run was well and truly on.
  And it was down to the eye in the sky  to get Didier into the heart of the action.
  We've got thousands of sharks approximately 200 metres offshore.
  You guys make your way out there,  you'll be mad enough to go into the water.
  I'll talk you onto it, guys.
 It's really looking good.
  It's just sharks and sards all over the place.
  We are in the area.
  Didier wants us to deploy on the highest concentration of sharks.
  Would you please guide us onto that area.
  Come 20 degrees left, you've got 40 metres to run.
 40 metres to run.
  I'm going to put you in the front of the sards.
  Seconds to run, divers ready.
  Nine, eight, seven, six,  five Divers ready.
  Four, three, two, one.
 Go! Divers away.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The great tide was indeed living up to its name.
  At last Didier had some action to film.
  He had good visibility and sardines in abundance.
  But without dolphins around,  the feeding frenzies just weren't happening.
  The sharks were unable to feed on the vast walls of fish  and despite their impressive numbers, they were surprisingly wary of Didier.
  No, very quiet, moving slowly.
 They are the lords of the sea.
  No, there was no frenzy, no attack.
  I think they get prepared for the big action.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Didier had yet to even see a big bait ball  and there was only one week left for all the elements to come together -  clean water, lots of sardines, and just the right mix of predators.
  And if there was one place to find it, it was Waterfall Bluff.
  Huge numbers of predators were starting to gather.
  This was the most action the underwater crew had seen in two years,  and again it was down to Eric to put them on it.
  ERIC: This is Raven.
 Yeah, we've got some major activity here  just off Mkambati.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They were into the last week of filming  and the pressure was showing.
  Yeah, this looks very, very good.
  At two o'clock, just here, but it's moving quite fast.
  MAN: 'Cause the dolphins are chasing it.
  ERIC: Make a slow 90.
 Go right 90 degrees.
  The tricky part is actually getting us onto the bait ball  without breaking it up.
  Ridden over the bait ball.
 Just stop.
  ERIC: Joker, I think you've screwed that up.
  Too far! Don't get there.
 Move the boat, to the right!  -Below Eric.
 Below Eric.
 Where's Eric? -We should go outside there.
  Now we have to go fast and to think fast!  ATTENBOROUGH: On the second-to-last day of filming,  Didier finally got his chance.
  Okay, Didier.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Years of work had gone into putting Didier on the front line.
  Now it was down to him.
  After 90 days of filming,  he had less than an hour in which to fulfil his dream -  to film a bait ball in perfect conditions.
  Didier was at last  amongst the greatest gathering of predators on the planet.
  He'd managed to get closer than anyone to the feeding frenzy,  without becoming part of it.
  Ah! Today was the day.
 We just found a bait ball.
  We were looking for months, years,  and we finally found it.
  Only one problem.
 The sharks were too much aggressive.
  We were very We got bumped a few times by sharks,  and that was just a bit serious.
  All that action came and that was just an amazing spectacle.
  All those birds diving together.
  Bom, bom, bom.
 Boom, boom.
  Like real cannon explosion.
  And all those sharks under, following.
  And the dolphins.
 That was just magical.
 Magical.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The feeding frenzy they filmed that day  ended as quickly as it had begun.
  After two long years, Didier and the crew  had managed to be in just the right place  at just the right time  for one of our ocean's greatest events.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun drives the seasons,  transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  One of the most remarkable transformations  occurs here in Southern Africa, in the desert lands of the Kalahari.
  Large herds of animals trek for months in search of food and water,  waiting for an event that will dramatically change their lives.
  For once a year, life-giving water turns an area of unforgiving desert  into a vast, watery paradise known as the Okavango.
  Where and when the Okavango will flood  determines the fate of millions of animals,  making this one of nature's truly great events.
  In the heart of Southern Africa, the desert lands of the Kalahari  cover an area of almost 400,000 square miles.
  It's one of driest places on Earth,  yet miraculously, great herds of grazing animals survive here.
  They lead a nomadic existence,  trekking huge distances in search of food and water.
  It's the start of the dry season.
 It won't rain for eight months,  and so life, already hard, is about to get even harder.
  Of all the animals here,  perhaps the most resourceful are the elephants.
  Each family is led by an older female, the matriarch,  and they all rely on her experience to guide them through the desert.
  Her years here have taught this matriarch that, one day,  hundreds of miles to the west, she will find a lush grassland.
  But before she will find it,  her family will have to survive many months in the desert.
  The water that could transform their lives  has its origins a thousand miles away,  in the rain clouds over the highlands of Angola.
  (THUNDER CRASHES)  The rain is so plentiful it has the power to transform a desert.
  It cascades southwards, not to the sea, but into the heart of the Kalahari,  towards a basin shaped like a hand  known as the Okavango.
  Here it will fill the swamp that lies at its entrance.
  And only if the rains have been plentiful  will water flood out onto the arid plains beyond,  transforming them into the grassland paradise  that the herds so badly need.
  Out in the desert, the elephants need to find water every three days.
  Thirsty elephants often race into pools,  but the matriarch knows that her family must not rush in.
  This pool is stagnant,  and the elephants have a trick that deals with that.
  Sediment settles to the bottom,  and the cleaner, fresher water lies on the surface.
  They skim it carefully from the top.
  Then, as gently as elephants can, they move forward slowly,  trying not to disturb the stagnant layers.
  But precious water like this draws in herds from far and wide.
  In the exuberance of a greeting all their careful work is undone.
  When bulls are forced together by the need for water,  tempers can flare.
  At this time of year, food and water can often be far apart.
  And so, now that the little ones are refreshed,  the family has to head off to find food.
  The distant Okavango plains that they're heading for are still dry,  and getting even drier.
  Trapped catfish struggle in a shrinking pool.
  And the burning sun is not their only enemy.
  (CAWING)  An opportunity like this attracts eagles from many miles away.
  Usually, they dive and snatch fish from the surface of the water,  but in this drought they won't have to work so hard.
  These are prized catches.
  Marabou storks and jackals muscle in on the leftovers.
  But even with this bounty of fish,  it's in an eagle's nature to steal a meal rather than catch its own.
  And all this squabbling gives the marabou a chance.
  Got it!  Only the return of the flood can save these fish now.
  All around these pools,  the grass on the Okavango plains continues to wither and die.
  But there's still some nourishment left in the leaves,  and millions of tiny mouths make the most of what remains.
  Termites chop the dead grass and drag it underground  to feed their colony.
  They play a crucial role,  helping to return nutrients to these poor soils.
  But now, taking the last, precious grass,  they leave dust and sand in its place.
  With the grazing animals dispersed far and wide,  it's leaner times for predators here.
  Only a desperate leopard would tackle a porcupine.
  This youngster is about to meet double trouble.
  The only place to get a bite is on their undersides.
  But the porcupines work together to watch each others' backs.
  The leopard will have to flip one over.
  Pin-sharp quills can easily snap off and become embedded in flesh.
  It's a highly effective defence that can also be turned into attack.
  It's a harsh lesson,  but with luck and a bit of healing time, there'll be no lasting damage.
  Two hundred miles away,  the pulse of life-giving water has now reached the swampland  at the entrance to the Okavango.
  Here, thick beds of papyrus act like a sponge,  slowing the water's progress.
  The swamp can take months to fill,  and only then, if there is enough water,  can it overflow and rejuvenate the plains on which the herds depend.
  Far to the east,  the matriarch elephants have led their families to desert woodlands.
  It seems an odd place to come - there's no sign of food  and there's little shade for the calves.
  But elephants can do something unusual.
  They can eat and digest seemingly lifeless branches.
  The youngsters need to learn that dry sticks are nutritious,  and that there is moisture in the bark.
  But bark won't feed the youngest calves.
  They need to drink 1 5 litres of milk a day,  so their mothers desperately need water as well as food.
  Exhaustion has got the better of one young female.
  But she won't get the chance to rest for long.
  The next waterhole could be 30 miles away,  and the whole herd needs to get moving.
  Back on the Okavango plains,  the last remnants of grass are going up in smoke.
  It's bad news for the few grazers that remain.
  A few birds collect the escaping insects.
  But fires don't help those who need to eat grass here and now.
  The Okavango plains are at their most desolate.
  Yet, out in the desert,  the elephant herds are heading towards them.
  The matriarchs guide their families along the maze of trails  to the next waterhole.
  And this time there's no hanging about.
  It soon turns into a mud bath.
  But elephants have a use for the mud, too,  for mud acts both as a sunscreen and an insect repellent.
  Buffalo have learned to follow the elephant trails to water.
  There is a clear pecking order here.
  Elephants take priority,  and zebra are the last in the line.
  (SNUFFLING)  Even when young bulls have drunk their fill,  they still torment the buffalo.
  And they definitely know which end to aim for.
  By the time the herds face their final trek across open desert,  the swamp has filled.
  The channels which lead out onto the parched plains  get their first, welcome trickle of water.
  Amazingly, when the plains are at their driest,  fresh water from a distant land spills into the parched river beds.
  First it fills the dry channels,  leaving the baked plains on either side hard and dry.
  All along the route it finds empty pools to fill.
  And now, these pools become magnets for birds,  which flock here from the surrounding desert lands.
  Red-billed quelea can now collect those grass seeds  that the termites have missed.
  For most of the year, the quelea are nomadic,  and it's this freedom to follow the water  that helps make quelea one of the most numerous birds on Earth.
  As the water fills the Okavango,  animals that have survived in shrinking waterholes  begin to move in.
  Female hippos gather in the best territories.
  And this male is prepared to fight for one.
  Only a dominant bull will mate with the females,  and the current chieftain isn't prepared to give way.
  (GRUNTS)  The intimidation begins.
  When neither backs down, there can be only one outcome.
  Fights can go on for hours and can be to the death.
  Forward-pointing tusks can stab right through protective blubber.
  This savage bite to the head brings the contest to an end.
  The incumbent has re-established his right to mate with the females,  and he wastes no time.
  This is a prime territory,  and he will face many more challenges if he is to continue to hold it.
  The loser is badly injured.
  Hippos can die from infected wounds,  but this young male is fit and should survive.
  Ox-peckers are a mixed blessing.
  They keep his wounds clean, but they also keep them open.
  Fresh water continues to pump through the Okavango plains,  bringing life wherever it flows.
  But out in the Kalahari, water is now almost impossible to find.
  A matriarch has led her family many miles,  only to find the waterhole empty.
  This year the drought is gripping hard.
  Each matriarch encourages her family onward.
  The calves' lives depend on her.
  And with pools so scarce now,  even when she finds water, they won't be drinking alone.
  At this time of year, some lion prides base themselves around waterholes,  and they're always on the lookout for a meal.
  But the elephants' desperate need to drink outweighs the risk.
  The mothers are producing less milk, and the calves are weak.
  The adults try to shield them from watchful eyes.
  It's an uneasy stand-off.
  In daylight, the elephants should have nothing to fear.
  The lions creep as close as they dare, as they too try to drink.
  One mistake from an elephant and the lions could attack.
  Big cats keep tired elephants on their toes.
  (TRUMPETING)  While the desert experiences the peak of the drought,  the meandering network of channels in the Okavango  is finally brimful.
  They are ready to overflow.
  Fish gather, ready to ride the flood as a miracle begins to materialise.
  And the barrier of desert sand seems to dissolve in the magical water.
  Under cloudless Kalahari skies,  fresh, sweet water at last begins to bathe the parched plains.
  Millions upon millions of litres surge over the banks.
  This is what the fish have been waiting for.
  New life returns.
  And as the water soaks deep into the sand,  it stirs dormant animals into life.
  Others are more forcibly evicted.
  It's all fresh food, a banquet ready for the feasting.
  Water birds follow the advancing front, making the most of the sudden harvest.
  The plains soon teem with life.
  But not all are here to feed.
  Some have come to breed.
  No one knows where they've come from,  but within moments of the flood's arrival,  tens of thousands of dragonflies appear at the water's edge.
  The vivid red male leads his partner in a magical dance,  guiding her to lay their eggs in the shallows.
  The flood spills ever onwards,  until it finally reaches the outer fringes of the Okavango.
  The catfish, miraculously, still cling to life.
  Within moments, the life-giving power of fresh water revitalises them.
  And now, on the plains that appeared so lifeless,  some of the most beautiful and colourful changes occur.
  Within days, fields of lilies burst into life.
  They provide pollen for the early bees, and a hiding place for reed frogs.
  And it's only now that the most crucial gift of the flood, the grass  that the desert herds need so badly, begins to grow.
  Hippos bulldoze their way towards the sprouting grasslands,  their paths opening up new arteries that help keep the water flowing.
  In just a few weeks,  thousands of square miles of dry desert plains  are turned into a watery green grassland.
  The network of hippo paths benefits all kinds of other animals,  from predatory crocodiles to the grazing herds.
  This fresh grass is what the elephants, and indeed all the grazing animals,  have been waiting for.
  Their pace quickens.
  For months, they have only known the dry smell of the desert.
  And now, they can catch the scent of fresh grass in the wind.
  Red lechwe are the first to take advantage of the young shoots.
  The lions are no threat here.
  They're not very fast in water, and their prey seem to know it.
  Lechwe revel in the safety the flood brings.
  Soon they will be joined by the herds of elephant and buffalo.
  And the lions seem to know they're not far away.
  Baboons don't enjoy getting their feet wet,  but the banquet of flowers and juicy snails is just irresistible.
  But they are at their most vulnerable here  from lurking crocodiles,  so they keep an ever-watchful eye.
  Babies just cling on tight and hope the water doesn't get too deep.
  At their feet, the flooded plains are now a vast fish nursery,  teeming with life.
  Predatory fish follow.
  But they too will have to be wary.
  For the Okavango now puts on one of the finest bird shows  to be seen anywhere in the world.
  The rising waters create thousands of tiny islands.
  Safe from predators, surrounded by fish,  these are the perfect place to raise chicks.
  This is the miracle of the Okavango.
  Once a year, it provides a magical time of plenty  at the height of the dry season, in the middle of a desert.
  Only now, with the grasslands at their most productive,  do the great herds arrive,  and they've timed it to perfection.
  The herds grow larger as elephant families and buffalo  converge from all over the desert.
  But as they all get closer to the flooded grassland,  there is one final challenge to face.
  Lions have chosen this thick cover to lay their ambushes.
  Their favourite prey is the buffalo.
  Adult buffalo are powerful and can easily trample lions,  so the lionesses seek out weaker calves that fall behind the herd.
  A nervous buffalo mother spots their approach  and the herd stampedes.
  One lioness takes a gamble, moving in on a well-protected calf.
  The buffalo close ranks,  and suddenly, the lionesses beat a hasty retreat.
  (ROARING)  In the panic, calves are separated from their mothers.
  Amid the confusion, a lioness darts in and grabs one.
  Many buffalo will fall to lions here.
  Lions are opportunists,  and even an unguarded elephant calf can be vulnerable.
  The elephants are nervous.
  The scent of lion is all around, yet they can't see them.
  A lioness is following them,  trying to separate the young straggler from the herd.
  (TRUMPETING)  One adolescent fights back, confronting its enemy.
  In a panic, the family stampedes.
  The straggler is taken.
  After months of arduous trekking,  this elephant family has lost one of its young ones.
  But most of the elephants, at last, have made it through,  and the great flood awaits.
  Older elephants have been here many times before,  but the newest calves have never seen so much refreshment.
  At last, they get that first drink of sweet, fresh water.
  Thousands of buffalo and zebra  have also made it to the magical Okavango wetlands.
  Somehow, these remarkable elephants have learned how to find a flood  from hundreds of miles away, and to time their arrival just right.
  If it wasn't for this annual gift of precious grass,  the herds couldn't survive the dry season  in the surrounding Kalahari.
  This year the Great Flood has lived up to its name.
  The lives of these elephants  are dominated by this annual rhythm of wet and dry,  a seasonal cycle driven by the power of the sun.
  The Okavango River has no great lake to flow into,  nor does it ever reach the sea.
  Its life-giving waters simply evaporate  into the great emptiness of the Kalahari sky.
  In a few months, some may fall as rain far to the north,  and, once again,  become part of this miraculous event in the Okavango,  that is the Great Flood.
  In the making of ''The Great Flood'',  the biggest challenge for the filming team  was to capture the magical moment  when new floodwater first transformed the desert.
  But to do this would mean crossing  some of the most challenging terrain in the world,  pitting themselves against the very water they'd come to film.
  We're right in the heart of the delta right now.
  The flood's been in here for a couple of weeks,  but the real action's happening out west,  across 20 kilometres of deep swampland.
  And our mission right now is to get this crane rig out there  to where the action's really happening,  and see if we can get a great new perspective on the flood coming in.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To achieve this new look,  the team were using some of the latest camera technology.
  But first they had to find the advancing flood,  and the only way to do this was from the air.
  Mike has worked here for more than 20 years,  and knows that this will be a race against time.
  The flood was already well advanced,  and wasn't going to wait for a film crew.
  Mike pinpointed the water's edge,  and on his way back, laid a GPS trail to follow.
  The flight took only 20 minutes,  but it would take the ground crew at least three days or more  to get there.
  And there was no guarantee they'd get through the swamps.
  -Are you watching for crocodiles? -Yeah.
  Okay, good.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Fortunately, at this cooler time of year,  crocodiles are less active and wouldn't pose a serious threat.
  The reason Richard's wading in crocodile-infested waters  is that we're on this side, and we need to be on the other side,  and he's wading so that we can see how deep it is  for this vehicle to cross.
  ATTENBOROUGH: These trucks are specially adapted  to cope with such extreme conditions.
  They can drive in water up to seven feet deep,  and cross all but the boggiest terrain.
  Unfortunately, not all the equipment fared so well.
  I don't think this is gonna be much use to anyone.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But even the vehicles weren't immune to such punishing use.
  Problems always arise when you least expect it.
  This truck, which is our swamp truck,  has decided  to give us problems again.
  The dif has basically collapsed on us.
  We're running out of daylight at the moment,  so we got to swap this out.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To film here, you have to be a jack of all trades,  a filmmaker, a tracker and a mechanic.
  Despite some on-the-spot bush repairs, a replacement part had to be ordered in.
  Hello.
  (GROANS)  It's going to be a long night in the bush.
  ATTENBOROUGH: All the crew could do now was wait.
  With the nearest garage over two days away by truck,  there was only one way the new part could be delivered.
  Now the crew could get back on the road and start making up for lost time.
  -Are you all right? -MAN: Yeah, I'm good.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But they would have to choose their route carefully.
  The best way to pick a path is where the elephants cross,  because they've got regular routes that are the shallowest places.
  But often where they've crossed, it's churned up the mud as well,  so we try and stay slightly off to the edge of the path.
  But once you get into the middle of that,  it's just hope like hell and keep going.
  Because it's probably deep and very soggy in the middle.
  Okay, this is getting a bit silly.
 We're officially stuck.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Mike's concerns proved well-founded.
  The shallower route was simply too boggy.
  That left the crew with no choice but to tackle the longer, deeper route,  and hold their nerve.
  MAN: It's coming over your windows.
  (EXCLAIMS) I'm getting wet.
  (EXCLAIMS) Water's coming in!  It's a little damp in here now.
  That was interesting, but we made it across the swamp!  ATTENBOROUGH: Success!  Mike and the team had finally got ahead of the flood.
  They were now in a truly privileged position,  ready to capture the amazing transformation  that was about to unfold.
  Okay, so drop the camera over the middle of the pool there.
  The flood had arrived.
  Here it comes.
  Three, two, one  ATTENBOROUGH: Using cranes and specially developed close-up camera systems,  the Nature's Great Events team could finally set about  bringing the advancing flood to life.
  This is one of those magical transformation moments,  where you've got a landscape which is asleep that way,  and you've got the flood, which is like the catalyst  which is going to bring the landscape to life.
  And it's happening right in front of us, which is amazing.
  And we've got a bit of macro kit  that exists nowhere else in the world,  and we're able to just follow it at the really tiniest level.
  ATTENBOROUGH: This was the Great Flood,  but filmed on a scale that had never been seen before.
  Seems like my hole is filling up.
  I'm going to get wet, Rick.
 I'm going to drown in three inches of water.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Each year, the magical flood rewards Mike with something new.
  Despite years of filming here, he'd never seen so many dragonflies.
  It's amazing, that, isn't it?  Have you ever watched this happen before?  It is amazing.
  I mean, you think this is going on all over the delta.
  Miles and miles and miles of water just spreading everywhere  at this rate.
  Incredible.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And the team had managed to capture  just a tiny part of it,  revealing in intimate detail the character of the Great Flood.
 
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: The power of the sun drives the seasons,  transforming our planet.
  Vast movements of ocean and air currents  bring dramatic change throughout the year.
  And in a few special places, these seasonal changes  create some of the greatest wildlife spectacles on Earth.
  The seas along the Pacific coast of North America  can be some of the richest on the planet.
  These coastal waters create the perfect conditions  for the greatest explosion of life on Earth.
  It's driven by some of the tiniest creatures.
  As their numbers multiply, they feed vast shoals of fish,  which in turn provide food for ever larger hunters.
  Billions of lives will be shaped by this immense bloom.
  And the mightiest hunter of them all  has devised a remarkable way to harvest this great feast.
  It's January.
  Both land and sea are locked in the depths of winter.
  (BIRDS CAWING)  The seas along the coast of Alaska and British Columbia  can become the richest on Earth.
  But for the moment, they lie dormant.
  The time of great feasting is many months away,  and a number of magical changes must first take place.
  The most crucial change will be driven by the sun.
  But now it is weak and offers little to those trapped here for winter.
  This coastline, a maze of islands and inlets  carved by glaciers, will also shape this great event.
  For now, it remains shrouded in cold.
  Only the toughest can survive.
  (WIND BLOWING)  Steller's sea lions huddle together to share warmth.
  It's 1 5 degrees below zero.
  They have little choice but to suffer this,  the coldest Alaskan winter on record.
  The shoals of fish they depend on  spend winter in the deepest water.
  (SEA LION GRUNTING)  For now the fishing is hard.
  (SEA LION GRUNTING)  It's an unforgiving place to raise a family.
  Conditions are so severe  that mothers must suckle their young for up to three years.
  For this pregnant sea lion, the risks are even greater.
  The seas must come to life in good time  for the arrival of her pup,  and at this stage, the odds don't look good.
  (WIND HOWLING)  For now, all she can do is wait  for the sun to bring change.
  These seas have the potential  to be so rich at the height of the great feast,  that they will attract animals from across the vast Pacific.
  And 3,000 miles away in the waters of Hawaii,  another mother is about to embark on an epic journey.
  (HUMPBACK WHALE SINGING)  This humpback whale has already given birth.
  Her calf is just a few weeks old.
  He stays close to his mum.
  (HUMPBACK WHALES SINGING)  The difference between Hawaii and Alaska could hardly be greater.
  These are calm, warm waters with few predators,  an ideal nursery for the youngster.
  The calf is now drinking  400 litres of milk every day,  building up strength  for the long voyage he'll soon have to undertake.
  More than 5,000 humpbacks come to Hawaii each year.
  The males, lured here in the hope of mating,  compete among themselves with great shows of strength.
  But none of these whales can actually feed here,  for these tropical waters are comparatively lifeless.
  (WHALE ROARING)  The ocean's greatest riches  are only to be found in colder seas.
  So all these whales must return to the North Pacific to feed.
  The playful calf suckles from his mother every day.
  But she hasn't had anything to eat  since she left Alaska over four months ago,  and she won't feed again until she returns.
  Like the pregnant sea lion,  this mother has to get her timing right.
  She must arrive in Alaska for the moment when the seas  are at their richest, full of fish.
  Their journey north will take three months.
  Back in Alaska, the seas are starting to awaken.
  It's March, and as the sun gathers strength,  winter loosens its grip.
  For the sea lions, things are beginning to look up.
  The sun is drawing life from the depths.
  (SEA LIONS BLOWING AIR)  With each passing day, the sun warms the water for longer,  penetrating deep into the mineral-rich waters.
  Fertilising nutrients of phosphorous and nitrogen  fuel a miraculous change that is just beginning.
  Empty seas start to come to life.
  As we enter an enhanced view of this microscopic world,  we see the beginnings of a magical transformation.
  Phytoplankton, tiny floating plants, emerge.
  Each is scarcely bigger that a speck of dust.
  But together, these plankton will bloom in such immense numbers  that they transform lifeless seas.
  And whether that will happen this year is yet to be determined.
  All creatures here, from the sea lions to the migrating whales,  ultimately depend on these miniature plants.
  For one creature that relies directly on the plankton,  this is the moment to emerge.
  Pacific herring have spent the winter in the depths of the fjords,  but they now rise up and head for the shallow coast.
  Stimulated by the sun and the warming water,  they gather in their hundreds of millions.
  But they're not drawn here to feed.
  They're following an irresistible urge to breed.
  Groups of males sweep through the shallows  and release their sperm in vast, milky clouds.
  The females follow, covering the seabed with eggs.
  Such a concentration of fish  is just what the sea lions have been waiting for.
  The herring won't be here for long.
  The sea lions must make the most of the fishing while it lasts.
  Other predators gather, also hungry after the lean winter.
  This short-lived bounty  is a magnet for millions of migrating birds.
  This is just the first brief course in the great feast.
  The herring spawning will be over in a matter of days,  and the shoals of fish will then scatter along the coast.
  The herring have spawned on an astonishing scale.
  They turn hundreds of miles of coastline white with spawn.
  In this bay alone,  they have laid 800 billion eggs.
  The herrings' spawning is so timed  that when the next generation hatch in a few weeks  they'll be able to feed on the growing plankton.
  And this year, the herring appear to have timed it just right.
  The minute plant plankton,  the driving force behind the seas' transformation,  are starting to bloom.
  Great swathes of sea grow green with life.
  The humpbacks are still out in the middle of the Pacific.
  They've missed the first taste of the great feast.
  At just eight weeks old,  the young calf must cross the biggest ocean in the world.
  His mother will only swim as fast as her young calf.
  As he tires, she supports him from beneath.
  She's been living off her fat reserves  for the last six months,  and has lost a third of her body weight.
  She's close to starving.
  (WHALES SPOUTING WATER)  It will be a further two months before mother and son  reach their feeding grounds in the North Pacific.
  It's May, early summer in Alaska,  and the days are getting ever longer.
  The sun continues to fuel the growth of microscopic plants  that make up the plankton bloom.
  They're joined by a growing community of tiny animals  zooplankton.
  These are the first creatures to feed on the bloom.
  Over the coming months they will multiply,  crowding the surface waters in their trillions.
  The next stage of the great feast is underway.
  All life here depends on this plankton bloom.
  The herring feed on it directly.
  The greater the bloom, the more abundant the shoals.
  And the fish themselves become food for the larger hunters.
  But the shoals of herring are now spread far and wide,  and once again, for the sea lions  the fishing is tough.
  They must venture further to find food.
  But open water is a risky place to fish.
  This male sea lion hunts alone.
  He is three metres long and a ton in weight.
  Few would dare tackle him.
  (SEA LION BLOWS AIR)  The smaller females travel as a group,  keeping a watchful eye in all directions.
  They know that killers lurk in the depths.
  The surface is a dangerous place to linger,  especially if you're alone.
  Orca.
 Killer whales.
  The sea lion is wounded, but the killers keep their distance.
  His powerful jaws are still a threat to the hungry orca.
  He struggles towards the safety of land.
  But his injuries are slowing him down.
  (ORCA CRASHING)  Blow by blow, they wear him down.
  It's a carefully coordinated attack.
  One killer distracts his attention,  while another hits his soft underside.
  (ORCA CRASHING)  The richest seas on Earth can be treacherous.
  Orca attacks, although savage,  have little impact on the fate of most sea lions.
  Their survival depends more on the tiny plankton  that sustains the great shoals of fish on which they feed.
  It's now late May.
  The sunlight lasts for 1 7 hours a day.
  But the bloom will need more than just sun  if it's to reach its full extent.
  Nutrients held in these waters are continuously used up  as the bloom increases.
  If they're exhausted too early,  the plankton will die and the food chain will collapse.
  The effects will be felt by all.
  Meanwhile, on the sea lion colony,  new life is now arriving.
  After a year carrying her pup,  this mother can at last give birth.
  (SEA LIONS GRUNTING)  The pup is utterly dependant on his mum.
  As he makes sense of his new world,  she encourages him to take his first feed of milk.
  The mother has waited until early summer to have her baby -  such a small pup would never survive the winter.
  Along this coast,  thousands of pups are born within a matter of weeks,  timed to coincide with the better conditions that may lie ahead.
  (SEA LIONS GRUNTING SOFTLY)  The migrating humpbacks are still weeks away from Alaska  and their first meal.
  (WHALE BLOWING AIR)  In these turbulent seas,  mother and calf must stay close.
  A huge Pacific storm is brewing  and heading straight for the coast of British Columbia.
  (WAVES CRASHING)  Directly in its path lies the sea lion nursery.
  The pups are now at the mercy of the elements.
  The mothers must get their young to the safety of higher ground,  if they can find it.
  (WAVES CRASHING)  In desperation, a mother tries to drag her pup away  from the gathering tempest.
  A pup swept into the water  is unlikely to be seen again.
  As the seas begin to subside, many have survived.
  But others have not.
  There's nothing this mother could have done to save her pup.
  These mighty storms, though devastating for some,  bring fresh life to the great feast.
  (WATER RUSHING)  When these storms hit the coast,  they stir up vital nutrients  into the surface waters, nutrients that feed the plankton.
  Replenished seas combine with the lengthening days  to create a plankton explosion.
  And this has come just in time  for those at the end of an incredible journey.
  The humpbacks have arrived.
  After 3,000 miles, mother and calf  have finally made it to the coast of Alaska.
  They join other whales that have also made the long voyage.
  But their journey isn't over, for they have yet to feed.
  They're heading for a particular stretch of coast  deep in the network of channels,  where they know they can find the great shoals of herring.
  It's to these ancestral feeding grounds  that the mother now guides her new calf.
  The unique geography of this coastline  holds the final secret to this great event.
  Glaciers have carved a landscape  of deep fjords and islands over tens of thousands of years.
  This patchwork creates a labyrinth  through which powerful ocean and tidal currents flow,  bringing up the vital raw ingredients needed for the bloom.
  It's as if an endless supply of fertiliser  is being added to the water.
  In other seas, the plankton would be subsiding by now.
  But here the seas are repeatedly invigorated,  which fuels the plankton bloom  time and again throughout the summer.
  And with the sun at its most powerful,  all these elements combine  to create a plankton bloom of great intensity.
  In July, the ocean is alive.
  This floating community of plants and animals  is the basis for all life here,  and a bloom of this intensity  signals the start of a truly great feast.
  Where this rich soup hits the sea bed,  life carpets every available surface.
  The feasting begins with millions of tiny mouths.
  Barnacles sift morsels of plankton brought in on the currents.
  Many of these creatures started their lives  as part of the plankton before reaching adulthood  and settling on the sea floor.
  These animals are giants.
  They filter the plankton-rich water,  growing larger here than anywhere else in the world.
  Jellyfish gather, forming great swarms.
  They, too, eat the plankton, rising to the surface  where it is at its most abundant.
  By late summer, the plankton bloom is so vast  it radiates across the North Pacific.
  Blooms like these provide Earth with over half of its oxygen.
  This bloom eclipses even the Amazon rainforest  in sheer abundance of plant life.
  And it is most intense  where the ocean streams through the maze of coastal waterways.
  The shoals of herring are now at their most plentiful.
  After feeding through the summer months,  the fish themselves are a good catch,  the main target for predators now gathering here.
  After enduring the bitter winter,  the sea lions can enjoy the bounty they've been waiting for.
  Hunting together, they drive the herring to the surface.
  Then, with mesmerising grace,  they pick off fish one by one.
  For a few short weeks,  they'll have their share of the great feast.
  Others arrive to feed in the coastal waterways.
  (DOLPHINS CLICKING)  Pacific white-sided dolphins.
  They dart in and snatch fish as they go.
  The tidal currents now sweep herring up to the surface.
  Here, they're within diving range of sea birds.
  Murres are the first to find the fish.
  The shoal twists and turns,  trying to escape the surface dangers.
  But murres are so fast they can even out-swim the herring.
  They head off the escape,  making the shoal turn in on itself, creating a bait ball.
  The birds corral the herring  into an ever-tighter ball.
  But the commotion hasn't gone unnoticed.
  Gulls, ever the opportunists, are the next to turn up.
  They can dive no more than a metre,  so the fish are still out of reach.
  The murres only attack from beneath,  trapping the fish against the surface.
  But they push the herring within range of the gulls.
  It's a feeding frenzy.
  The table is set for the mightiest predator of them all.
  The humpbacks have reached their feeding grounds.
  After six months without a bite to eat,  the humpbacks can finally break their fast.
  The whales have learned to target these ready-made balls of fish.
  But they'll need more than just a mouthful,  and with the feast now in full swing,  this is their chance.
  To exploit the vast shoals of herring that are in deeper water,  they rely on teamwork.
  For these whales have developed a truly remarkable way of hunting.
  (WHALES SINGING)  The inlets echo to the sound of a mysterious song.
  (WHALES SINGING)  A curtain of bubbles  and a haunting call hold the secret  to an ingenious way of fishing.
  (WHALES SINGING)  (HIGH-PITCHED SINGING)  This is ''bubble-net feeding''.
  A dozen whales work together to harvest the herring bonanza.
  Such fishing requires an extraordinary level  of intelligence and cooperation.
  The lead whale dives first.
  She is the bubble-blower.
  It's her job to find the fish.
  (WHALE SPOUTING AIR)  The rest follow in formation.
  Each takes exactly the same position in every lunge.
  Once she's located the fish,  the leader blows a net of bubbles  that completely encircles the shoal.
  (WHALE SINGING)  Another whale calls to synchronise the group.
  (WHALE SINGING CONTINUES)  Panicked by the eerie sound and the blinding bubbles,  the fish won't cross this fizzing curtain.
  (HIGH-PITCHED SINGING)  As few as 1 00 humpbacks  have learnt how to feed as a team like this.
  And this is the only place on the planet where whales fish in this way.
  (LOUD MOANING)  At the height of the great feast,  these humpbacks fish around the clock,  each eating a ton of herring a day.
  Only man has learnt to exploit the seas  on a greater scale.
  As the summer ends, the feast draws to a close.
  The sun is weakening,  and with it, the plankton bloom subsides.
  The microscopic plants that brought life  to empty seas begin to die.
  The herring descend to spend the winter in the depths.
  Life for the sea lions will be harder once again.
  But they've fed well enough to face the dark days ahead.
  (WHALES SPOUTING AIR)  The humpback whales will soon leave these shores.
  It's astonishing to think that  some of our world's mightiest creatures  ultimately rely on some of its tiniest.
  Here, along the North Pacific coast,  the interplay between land, sea and sun  has produced a bloom of plankton so immense  it has created one of nature's great events.
  To capture the spectacle of the great feast,  the team would face many challenges,  none greater than filming it underwater.
  It was to lead to some surprising encounters.
  The crew had three weeks in late summer  to try to film all the underwater drama.
  They wanted to find the bait balls of herring that occur here,  in the hope of discovering exactly how  the different predators round them up.
  Cameramen Shane Moore and David Reichert  both have years of experience working here,  but even they were in for a big surprise.
  The key to filming the bait balls was to first find the predators.
  We're looking for gulls because the gulls tell us  where the diving birds are that are pushing the herring up.
  So, these are our first clue  to the good action, is these gulls, distant gulls in the air.
  A lot of diving birds, though.
  The murres are all here, and the auklets.
  So they're the ones that bring it all together, so they're all here.
  So we just have to watch it.
  That's something.
 I think that's some bait right there.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Bait balls don't last long,  so the crew had to get to this one quickly.
  But once in the water, a very careful approach is called for.
  So as not to panic the birds,  David eased closer to the action.
  (BIRDS SCREECHING)  And with this sensitive approach,  the birds stayed focussed on the feeding frenzy,  giving David the chance for a rather close-up view.
  But with so many predators, the fish were getting hammered.
  The bait ball was gone within minutes.
  It was an encouraging start,  but to get the full sequence they hoped for,  the crew would need to film more bait balls.
  And of course, they weren't the only ones looking for herring.
  It's only in the last five or six or seven years  that the humpback population here in this area has increased,  which is really encouraging.
  Look, you can see one way over there.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It was good to see the whales return,  but it posed an intriguing safety concern for Shane.
  I think it's extremely unlikely  that you could get swallowed by a whale,  (MAN LAUGHING)  but if there is a place, this is the place to do it because  they're coming up, they're very motivated to get his ball of fish,  and we're right there and we're just a little thing to a 30-ton whale.
  The good news is I've seen whales swallow birds and other things  and even big fish that they don't like, and they stop and spit it out.
  So, just way, way, way in the back of my mind  is the outside possibility that they might swallow David.
  You didn't tell me that.
  (SHANE LAUGHING)  ATTENBOROUGH: Mindful that there were whales in the area,  the crew turned their attention to filming  the other stars of the great feast,  Steller's sea lions.
  The plan was to dive amongst the kelp  and wait for the sea lions to come to them.
  We'll go in and try to, like, find a little eddy in there  because the animals are just on that point there.
  ATTENBOROUGH: This coast has some of the strongest tidal currents in the world,  essential for fuelling the plankton bloom,  but not so good if you're swimming against them  pushing a bulky camera.
  The current was getting stronger and the sea lions were nowhere to be seen.
  David was forced to admit  that even the best-laid plans don't always work.
  DAVID: That dive was a bit of a mess.
  You know, the currents come up so fast around here  that as soon as we got down there and got set up,  the current was going like four knots  and we were just hanging on to kelp  and trying to get in to find, like, some sort of  an eddy or something to work in,  but we never did and finally we just got washed down.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team had to wait for the tide to calm down.
  And it wasn't just the currents  that made filming sea lions underwater a bit tricky.
  What's really kinda driving us crazy here is all this plankton,  the water's very green,  not at all like the tropics where it's, you know, clear and beautiful.
  It's also what feeds everything here and that's why we have  the great amount of sea lions and all the fish and invertebrates.
  ATTENBOROUGH: On the next slack tide,  it was back into the soupy water to try again.
  They'd have to settle down on the sea bed and hope  the sea lions' inquisitive nature would draw them in.
  And this year's youngsters were definitely not camera-shy.
  The sea lions were obviously comfortable  getting up close and personal with Shane.
  Sometimes even a bit too personal.
  Even this three-metre-long male  seemed to want his share of the limelight.
  After success with the sea lions,  it was time for Shane and David  to turn their attention back to the bait balls.
  The strengthening tides were bringing more fish to the surface  and so, with just a few days left,  this was their best chance to get the shots they still needed.
  The birds were gorging on herring,  but at least one fish had a lucky escape.
  The herring, of course, in a panic look for a place to hide,  (CHUCKLES) and they found my camera,  so they'd be up in my view finder,  and of course they get in between those tubes there  because everything is trying to eat them, you know,  the murres and the Everything.
  (ALL CHATTERING)  There he is.
 Okay.
  So, this might be the lucky one.
  Big ball of fish.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It was the best year for bait balls  that David and Shane had ever seen.
  And they discovered how each of the predators feeds.
  It's the murres that corral the bait ball against the surface,  only ever attacking from beneath,  while the gulls just grab what they can.
  But no one was prepared for what happened next.
  (BIRDS SCREECHING)  Oh!  And David was right there.
  So, what's it like to find yourself that close to a feeding humpback?  Everything was hitting the ball,  and then I could hear the seagulls, of course, they were all around,  all of a sudden, poom, it got quiet and they all lifted off  and I said, ''Hmm.
''  And then sure enough, all the murres dropped out of the bottom,  and he was right there, right? When I got real close, I was like  (EXCLAIMING)  His mouth was just  (DAVID GRUNTING)  -MAN: Scary? -Yeah, it was scary.
  ATTENBOROUGH: To capture such astonishing images,  and for the very first time, was an unforgettable experience.
  Sitting beside that bait ball, and there's that moment of tension,  and that whale just came roaring through there,  and, you know, that's something that's gonna stay with me forever.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Shane and David had revealed a dramatic new way  that humpback whales take advantage of the great feast.
 
                    Over one third of our planet is frozen,  and yet the icy worlds of the Arctic and Antarctic  are as alien to most of us as the surface of another planet.
  They are places of superlatives,  from ice caps that hold nearly 80% of our planet's fresh water  to frozen forests that encircle the entire globe.
  These are places that feed our imaginations,  places that seem to be borrowed from fairytales.
  They're dominated and shaped by the ice,  both by its coming and by its going.
  This is our planet's last true wilderness  and one that is changing just as we are beginning to understand it.
  In this series we'll be travelling to all parts of these lonely lands,  both north and south,  to witness its wonders, perhaps for the last time,  and to discover some extraordinary examples  of survival against all the odds  as can be found anywhere on the planet.
  The Poles are permanently capped with ice.
  Nowhere is colder, windier or more hostile to life.
  I'm standing at the North Pole,  the very top of the Earth.
  Up here, it's easy to see why the polar regions are so cold.
  The sun never rises high enough in the sky to warm my back  and those rays that do strike the surface  are mostly reflected back from this great whiteness.
  But the fundamental problem  is that there's no sun here at all for half the year.
  The polar winter is unrivalled in its harshness,  a night that lasts for months.
  Only the toughest stay, as temperatures plunge  to minus 70 degrees centigrade.
  And yet the greatest challenge to life here is not the cold,  but the extreme swings between the seasons.
  When the sun finally returns, an extraordinary transformation begins.
  This frozen world begins to melt away.
  The polar spring brings a brief opportunity for life.
  By summer, the sun no longer sets and works its magic for 24 hours a day.
  Now it's a race to breed before the sun departs.
  By autumn, all but the hardiest abandon the Poles  and the ice extends its grip.
  Land and sea close down for the long polar winter  until, once again, the sun returns.
  It's spring in the high Arctic  and the sun illuminates a giant frozen ocean,  the first stop on our journey.
  The most powerful land predator is on the prowl.
  A male polar bear is searching for a mate.
  Willing females are few and far between  and the sea-ice on which he travels will soon melt and vanish.
  He's running out of time to find a mate in this vast frozen desert.
  Ten miles ahead,  a single female without cubs,  exactly what the male is seeking.
  He seems to relish her scent, even though she's miles away.
  This is an exciting prospect.
  She's clearly giving off the right signals.
  He locks onto her tracks, eager not to lose her trail.
  It's easier to tread in the compacted snow of her footprints.
  This pursuit could last for days.
  The female eventually comes into view.
  The search is finally over.
  For the female, only half his weight, this must be a nerve-wracking encounter.
  The male could kill her if he chooses.
  But he has other intentions.
  And she is ready and willing.
  She leads him to higher ground.
  It seems that courting polar bears prefer privacy,  often leaving the sea-ice and heading for the hills  to avoid the prying eyes of rival males who might disturb them.
  Few have witnessed this moment.
  For the male, his only tender encounter in an otherwise solitary life.
  But it doesn't last long.
  A rival suitor has also caught the female's scent.
  Courtship has to be put on hold, he must fight for his rights.
  He sees off this first challenger without injury to either party.
  But bloodier battles are to come.
  Another battle won, though he has been slightly injured.
  He hurries back to his mate,  but now she seems to have lost her enthusiasm.
  Female polar bears are high maintenance.
  Wherever she goes he will follow, mating with her when she allows  and guarding her at all times.
  Over the next two weeks, the male sees off many rivals,  but the battles take their toll on him.
  He is almost spent,  but he has ensured that no other bears have mated with his female.
  It's time for the couple to go their separate ways.
  She will give birth to his cubs, alone, in nine months' time,  and he may never see her again.
  He returns to the frozen ocean,  no doubt relieved to resume his solitary ways,  and just in time.
  The ice beneath his feet will soon be gone.
  Each spring the Arctic Ocean undergoes an extraordinary transformation.
  An area of sea-ice the size of Europe melts,  exposing the rich waters beneath.
  Short-tailed shearwaters have travelled 10,000 miles from Australia to be here.
  Eighteen million visitors darken the skies,  the largest gathering of sea birds on the planet.
  Humpback whales have come all the way from the Equator  to feed in these rich polar waters.
  Their giant tails are five meters across.
  Simply raising them above the surface  gives the whales enough downward momentum  to reach the great swarms of krill and herring below.
  The shearwaters follow the giants' lead.
  For those who can get here, in summer,  these waters provide a feast of epic proportions.
  But the good times will be very short,  a problem that faces all life in the polar regions.
  Journeying south across the Arctic Ocean,  the first land you reach is Greenland, the largest island in the world.
  Despite its name, Greenland is mostly white,  covered by a giant ice sheet  six times the size of the United Kingdom.
  In the middle of the island, the ice is nearly two miles thick.
  It's a bleak, quiet world.
  Sapphire-blue melt-lakes are the first sign  that a dynamic process is underway.
  Each lake forms in a matter of days,  expanding until it's miles across and starts to overflow.
  The spill water then carves its way through the ice.
  The water courses through an icy delta  like blood along the arteries of a cold-blooded monster,  a monster that is stirring.
  And without warning, the water suddenly plunges down an open shaft,  falling a vertical mile into the heart of the ice sheet.
  This meltwater has a surprising effect.
  It lubricates the junction between the ice and the rock floor beneath,  so the entire ice-sheet is now on the move,  sliding downhill into the ocean.
  This, Jakobshavn Isbrae,  is the fastest flowing glacier on our planet  moving as much as 40 meters a day.
  As it advances, it destroys everything in its path,  even cutting its way through Greenland's great mountain ranges  on its drive downwards towards the sea.
  When speeded up, these solid rivers of ice  seem to flow just like liquid rivers.
  This is the titanic force  that cuts down mountains and levels the surface of continents.
  The ice is now entering the last stage of its descent.
  As it gains speed, huge crevasses open that extend down to its very core.
  It's reached the ocean, and millions of tons of ice  have lost the support of their rocky bed.
  Something must give.
  These icefalls are an ominous sign of what is about to happen.
  A rupture deep within the glacier.
  A colossal iceberg is born.
  This single block of ice, many hundreds of meters across,  would dwarf the biggest of mankind's buildings.
  Every year, tens of thousands of icebergs  are spawned by Greenland's glaciers,  and their number is steadily increasing as the climate continues to warm.
  The break-up of the bergs  fills the bays of the Arctic with exquisite ice sculptures.
  It also releases great volumes of cold fresh water into the sea.
  Greenland's meltwater influences the course of the ocean currents,  which in turn has an effect on the weather around the world.
  The Arctic is closer to home than many of us realize.
  It includes the northernmost parts of the three continents  on which most of us live, Europe, Asia and North America.
  The first bare land we reach on our journey south  is a bleak, treeless wilderness known as tundra.
  Each spring, animals travel up from the south  to be ready for the rich grazing  that will be unveiled by the spring melt.
  For the caribou, the timing is critical.
  Arrive early and a winter storm could kill you.
  Delay too long and you may fail to lay down the fat needed  to survive a polar winter.
  Further south still and stooped, shrouded figures  end the flat monotony of the tundra.
  This is the tree-line,  the first place on our journey with sufficient warmth and liquid water  to enable a tree to grow.
  Surviving here is so crushingly difficult  that it can take hundreds of years for a seedling  to grow into a stunted shrub.
  But even small trees can provide cover for a predator.
  Wolves.
  These in northern Canada  are the largest and most powerful in the world  and they are setting out to hunt.
  The pack is 25 strong,  a sign that the prey they are seeking is formidable.
  These bison are even bigger than their southern cousins  and the largest land animals in North America.
  For generations, wolves and bison here  have been shaped by their battles with each other,  making each the most impressive of its kind.
  The bison will not stay long among the trees.
  They are not safe here.
  The wolves are closing in,  but their chance of ambushing the bison in the woods has passed.
  Their prey are now in the open and grouped together for safety.
  The wolves will need to work as a team if they're to make a kill.
  They circle the herd, trying to unsettle it and split it up.
  But the bison are armed and dangerous,  they will be safe as long as they stick together.
  The wolves up their game, harrying the herd,  a ploy to trigger a stampede and split away one of the smaller ones.
  The bison form a defensive circle around their young,  - horns pointing outwards.
  The wolves need a bison to break rank.
  But the tables are turning and now the wolves have to retreat.
  The pack focus their attention on the rear of the herd  and the bison begin to panic.
  A young bison falls behind.
  Even this yearling dwarfs the wolves.
  Running head-down, the herd's only thought is escape.
  A stroke of luck for the wolves.
  The kill will feed the pack for several days.
  But then they will have to resume the chase.
  At the frozen ends of our planet, the struggle for survival never eases.
  South of the tree-line the winters are shorter,  so trees grow faster and taller, and forests begin to appear.
  As the warm, humid air from the south meets the cold Arctic air,  the moisture it carries crystallizes, and snowflakes fall from the sky.
  Each crystal forms around a particle of dust.
  All have a six-fold symmetry  but no two have ever been found with exactly the same shape.
  Their variety and complexity is breathtaking.
  Each snowflake is water waiting to be released in spring.
  For this reason, snow is the lifeblood of these silent forests,  and all that live here depend on it in one way or another.
  Some, like the great grey owl,  appear in spring for the boom times, then vanish like phantoms.
  Others, like their lemming prey, are here year-round beneath the snow,  insulated from the cold air above.
  The northern forests are a crossroads for seasonal visitors  and Arctic specialists.
  But they are so much more than this.
  Together they make up the Taiga, an unbroken belt of forest  that stretches 7,000 miles around our planet  and contains one-third of all the trees on Earth.
  The Taiga forest marks the end of our journey through the Arctic,  from the frozen ocean down across the lands that surround it.
  The other end of our planet, the Antarctic, is starkly different,  a frozen continent completely surrounded by ocean.
  Icebergs here are so large  that they're measured in miles, not meters.
  They are the only obstacles in the path of giant waves,  which circle around the continent unchecked by other lands.
  These seas may be cold and storm-racked, but they're bursting with life.
  No bird is more at home in water, and they are masterful surfers.
  Penguins are found only in the Southern Hemisphere.
  They can't fly, but they don't need to.
  There are no polar bears here.
  These are Gentoo penguins.
  Each spring they come ashore to lay their eggs and rear their young.
  Their hungry chicks demand so much seafood  that both parents have to go fishing.
  And fishing can be dangerous.
  A southern sea lion.
  It uses the speed of a breaking wave to catch up with the Gentoos.
  Sea lions normally eat fish,  so he's used to catching streamlined swimmers.
  But the Gentoos seem more than his match out at sea.
  He must change tactics.
  Perhaps it will be easier in the shallows.
  But no, it seems penguins are uncatchable in water.
  How about on land?  The penguin's wings, so powerful for swimming,  are of no help when it comes to running.
  Now, surely, the sea lion has a chance.
  But on the beach, both are like fish out of water.
  Rarely do hunter and hunted play their roles with so little skill.
  The outcome is anyone's guess.
  Every summer, over 40 million penguins take to the Southern Ocean to feed.
  They're joined by thousands of whales.
 Minkes are the most numerous.
  They all come here to harvest the richest ocean on Earth.
  Carrying on south, we get our first glimpse  of the frozen continent.
  Southern humpbacks, after travelling 4,000 miles from the Equator,  are finally arriving in Antarctica.
  Humans have long felt the lure of this mysterious world,  yet it was only 100 years ago that the first explorers walked inland  and were confronted by the highest, driest and coldest territory on Earth.
  Every year the continent is transformed  as the sea-ice that surrounds it begins to disappear.
  This melt halves the size of Antarctica.
  It's the most spectacular seasonal change  occurring anywhere on our planet.
  The remnants of the sea-ice are occupied by sunbathing seals  that have been here all winter.
  But new arrivals are following the retreating ice edge  and they have come here to hunt.
  Killer whales, the ocean's top predator.
  Killers are like wolves,  for they will hunt animals far larger than themselves.
  But even smaller prey are a problem if you can't reach them.
  The solution is teamwork.
  Swimming in perfect formation, they flick their tails in unison  and create a wave that cracks the ice.
  They regroup and assess the damage.
  A more powerful wave is needed.
  The ice floe is breaking up.
  Now they are close enough to get a good look at their target.
  The seal is a crab-eater, sharp-toothed and feisty.
  Not their favorite.
  The wolves of the sea move on, in search of easier quarry.
  A Weddell seal.
 That's better.
  These are more docile and easier to tackle.
  The pod stays close together and travels silently.
  This time they unleash a far more powerful wave  and with astonishing accuracy.
  These big waves are not intended to break the ice,  but to knock the prey into the water, and they rarely fail.
  The seal is now where the killers want it.
  But the hunt is far from over.
  They need to grab their prey by the tail,  while avoiding its snapping jaws.
  Only then will they be able to pull it down and drown it.
  Sideswipes create violent underwater turbulence, a new tactic.
  Blowing bubbles gives cover for others to lunge at the seal's tail.
  Somehow the seal manages to reach a tiny ice floe.
  The killers could easily grab it,  but now this seems to have become a game.
  The seal's life hangs on a roll of the ice.
  Yet again, the pod joins forces to dislodge the seal.
  The seal sees a chance to escape.
  Exhausted, it no longer has the energy to pull itself to safety  and the killers are moving in.
  Game over.
  Although such team hunts are rarely seen,  scientists believe they may be the most complex ever documented  in the natural world.
  They were first witnessed by Captain Scott and his men  when they came to explore Antarctica 100 years ago.
  Journeying further south,  the fragmenting ice is replaced by a permanent sheet  that doesn't melt even at the height of summer.
  It's a barrier that many creatures find impassable.
  It repels even powerful Minke whales.
  They have to turn back  if they can no longer reach the air they need to breathe.
  Under the ice, life has to be extremely specialized to survive.
  Few of us will ever experience this strangely still world,  and as yet, no one knows much about it.
  The crystalline surface of the ice stalactites  provides a home for ice-fish, whose bodies are full of anti-freeze.
  The ceiling of ice shields those living below it  from the violent polar weather that rages above.
  Little here has changed for millions of years.
  The cold allows animals to grow very slowly and become giants.
  A relative of the woodlouse is the size of a dinner plate.
  And this so-called sea spider has legs that span half a meter.
  Now explorers are revealing other worlds  that lie hidden beneath the ice on land.
  These smoking towers are the gateway to a network of caves.
  Each contains an extraordinary assembly of ice crystals  unlike any other on Earth.
  Like snowflakes, every crystal is unique.
  Some are taller than a man.
  Others are thought to harbor life,  seeded by strange bacteria that thrive in these extreme conditions.
  The breeze that gently sways these crystals  is responsible for making them.
  It's steam from the molten heart of Mount Erebus,  the most southerly volcano on our planet.
  It's now thought that the ice caves fringing this crater  may even be a home for hitherto unknown life forms.
  From this oasis of warmth at the edge of the continent,  our journey continues inland towards the South Pole.
  The first great hurdle is the formidable Transantarctic mountain range.
  We are following the route taken by Scott and Amundsen  as they struggled to become the first humans  to reach the South Pole.
  They were travelling on foot  and their first sight of these mountains must have been daunting indeed.
  In front of them stretched one of the world's longest ranges,  spanning 2,000 miles  from one side of the continent to the other.
  The winds up here are the fastest on Earth.
  They reach speeds of 200 miles an hour.
  An ice-capped mountain bears the scars of the gales,  bizarre sculptures carved from solid ice.
  It's not only the ice that yields.
  This sculptured spire is a remnant of a mountain,  eroded from all sides by the ferocious elements.
  Beyond, a wholly unexpected landscape, the Dry Valleys.
  Only 1 % of Antarctica is free of ice, and most of that bare rock is here.
  The Dry Valleys are more like the surface of Mars  than is any other place on Earth.
  The floor is covered with extraordinary natural sculptures,  created by the same winds that help to keep these valleys free of snow.
  Over time, entire boulders are weathered from the inside out,  until just a shell remains.
  At the head of these valleys, the ice is making a break-through.
  Millions of tons are tumbling in slow motion into the valley.
  These ice blocks are the size of skyscrapers.
  And this is the Beardmore Glacier,  which Scott and his men somehow traversed on foot.
  It's over 100 miles long  and one of the largest glaciers on Earth.
  But nothing could have prepared those early explorers  for what they were about to encounter.
  The Antarctic ice cap,  the largest expanse of ice on the planet.
  It's three miles thick in places  and imprisons 70% of the world's fresh water.
  From here to the South Pole 700 miles away, there is nothing but ice.
  I'm at the South Pole at the end of my journey.
  Although it's mid-summer,  the temperature here is a bone-chilling 35 degrees below freezing.
  It's exactly 100 years, almost to the day,  that the first human beings stood right here,  Amundsen followed by Scott.
  In those days, reaching the poles  was regarded as the ultimate in human endeavor and endurance,  and a source of great national pride.
  Today the polar regions have a rather different significance.
  Because now we've come to understand that what happens here and in the north  affects every one of us, no matter where we live on this planet.
  The greatest challenge for the team making Frozen Planet  was the extreme remoteness of their locations.
  Many of the shoots lasted months at a time,  and needed a number of crews to join forces.
  One location that would require such siege tactics  was Mount Erebus, Antarctica's most active volcano.
  This magical mountain does not give up her secrets easily.
  To capture the full story of Mount Erebus  from top to bottom required four different film crews.
  The cave team is dropped off at 12,000 feet, close to the crater.
  In howling winds and thin oxygen,  their challenge is to find a way into the volcano itself.
  They are venturing into the unknown.
  Somewhere below are spectacular ice caves,  melted out by volcanic steam.
  Getting the team safely underground  is a relief for director Chadden Hunter.
  Excellent, it's a lot warmer down here.
  - It's freezing up there.
 - Minus 29.
  With him is cameraman Gavin Thurston.
  You sort of forget being in here, you are actually inside a volcano.
  You know, above us there's and below us, there's bubbling lava.
  And you've got all these gases seeping up through here,  which is how these caves are made,  so there's also increased carbon dioxide in here.
  As the cave team head deeper,  dangerous volcanic gases make breathing difficult.
  - The clock is ticking.
  They will not have long to find the caves of crystals.
  Above ground, the aerial team is pushing for the summit of Erebus.
  Series producer Vanessa Berlowitz directs from the front seat,  while aerial cameraman Michael Kelem  controls the camera attached to the nose.
  We're going to be around 14,000 feet,  we're going to be on the performance limits of this aircraft.
  Any bad weather comes in up there,  and you're pretty much screwed, really, you've got to get off the mountain fast.
  Above 10,000 feet, the pilot must breathe oxygen  -through a plastic tube in his nostrils.
 - Yeah, that's fine.
  Approaching the crater, conditions do not look good.
  Today Erebus is belching out steam and gases,  making flying extremely risky.
  Up here, the air is so thin,  the helicopter can't hover and must keep moving.
  This is aerial filming at its most extreme.
  They struggle to get a clear view.
  We're just coming up to 14,000 feet,  you can actually look right into the lava lake.
  Oh, that's looking really good, Mike, just hold that there.
  The cameraman captures a rare shot of the molten lava,  but it's soon obscured again.
  The volcano is temperamental.
  The team have seized a rare opportunity to see into its molten heart,  but now they must descend to safety.
  As the weather closes in above, the cave team are making progress below.
  It's Christmas Day, and the crew are dressed for the occasion.
  Just watch my back on these icicles.
  - I don't want to snap that top one off.
 - No problem.
  Oh!  Right.
 How strong are these pillars of ice, Matt?  How big around is it?  - It's about that round, about five - Really strong.
  So, if I squeeze past, it's not going to snap it.
  Gavin is reassured by advice from the scientist.
  --Oh, Gavin!  I'm sorry.
  That's terrible.
 Oh, look, look.
 It fits perfectly, look.
 Look at that.
  Fortunately, these crystals are made of frozen water  and can grow back in weeks.
  You've got these beautiful, clear, glass-like pillars,  and right next to it, this really delicate  Look how thin that filament is there.
  As the cave team explore deeper,  each chamber reveals ice crystals  more strange and spectacular than the last.
  No one on the team imagined a single Antarctic mountain  could house so many wonders.
  Down at the foot of Mount Erebus, a third crew, the dive team,  plan to explore the volcano's lower slopes,  which extend beneath the frozen sea.
  On board is underwater cameraman Hugh Miller.
  The problem is we don't actually know what's under the ice here.
  So who knows? It's a bit of an adventure.
  Old-fashioned tools still work best.
  First, a hand chisel to create an opening,  then a saw to widen the hole.
  Ice-diving in the coldest waters on the planet  should be taken extremely seriously.
  This dive's going to be a lot of things  and warm is not on that list.
  Insulated suits will keep them alive  under the ice for only 60 minutes.
  Once the helicopter departs, there's no margin for error.
  The dive team begin to explore the lower slopes of Erebus,  discovering a hidden world rarely seen by humans.
  Patrolling the icy shores of the volcano are killer whales,  the most southerly in the world.
  Tracking them from above is the Orca team.
  They need a helicopter to get ahead of the whales  and to land them on the fragile sea-ice.
  Cameraman Jamie McPherson must pick his spot carefully.
  His aim is to get the cameras  as close to the killer whales as possible without disturbing them.
  He uses a film camera to capture the action in slow motion.
  And orcas come right by him!  Even in the extreme cold,  a film camera proves to be rugged and reliable,  provided there's enough film in the camera.
  - End of the roll.
 - No!  I got him coming out, I just didn't get him going back in.
  Below the sea-ice,  the dive team is setting up an underwater studio.
  Using a range of waterproof lights and time-lapse cameras,  they hope to capture the growth of bizarre underwater ice formations.
  Over the coming weeks,  the dive team would go below the ice over 100 times  to film the extraordinary secret world  on the lower flanks of Mount Erebus.
  On top of the ice, the Orca team has repositioned.
  Their new goal is to get underwater shots of the whales.
  They don't dare to get in the water with Orcas,  attaching a camera to a pole is a safer option,  provided the whales aren't put off by it.
  No one is prepared for what happens next.
  Tell Scotty what you just saw.
  Hello!  The entire pod arrives.
  Eyeball to eyeball, this is about as close  to killer whales as it's possible to get.
  By using multiple crews and cameras, the Frozen Planet team  have been able to capture the full Erebus story,  from the fire at its crater  down to the whales that patrol its frozen shores.
  It's quite a privilege to feel whale breath on your face.
 
                    The sun is absent for up to half the year in the polar regions.
  When it returns, at the beginning of spring,  its warmth will transform this magical ice world.
  The greatest seasonal change on our planet is now underway.
  Antarctica is still locked in ice, and surrounded by a frozen ocean.
  Nonetheless, there are signs of spring.
  Adelie penguins are arriving  just the males.
  They've spent five months at sea, where it's warmer than it is on land  and now they're in a hurry, for spring will be short.
  They have travelled 6,000 miles across the ocean  since leaving their colony last year,  and now they're returning to breed.
  They cannot lay their eggs on ice, for they would freeze,  so they have to come here, where there is bare rock.
  Over the coming months,  the few parts of Antarctica that are ice-free  will be the stage on which five million Adelies  will build their nests.
  To construct one, they need pebbles, and without a good-looking nest,  a male will be unable to attract a female,  when they at last arrive.
  An impressive property demonstrates your worth as a mate.
  It takes stones of all shapes and sizes to build a decent nest,  and finding ones that are just right is not easy.
  So some penguins turn to a life of crime.
  The one who has been robbed seems unaware  that the thief is just over his shoulder, and looking for more.
  The thief's nest is coming along nicely,  probably because he keeps a particularly sharp lookout  for robbers  after all, it takes one to know one.
  It's still cold, but the early season sun  does lift the temperature by a few degrees.
  That, however, can have unexpected, even dangerous consequences.
  The sea is heating faster than the land,  pulling cold air from the middle of the continent towards the coast.
  These katabatic winds are stronger than any hurricane.
  They are the coldest and the most ferocious on the planet.
  The storms catch many new arrivals by surprise,  and are the reason that spring here is, in fact, the deadliest season.
  Here, early birds take a great risk.
  The survivors of this storm  must hope that the females prove to be worth the wait  when they finally decide to turn up.
  Spring in the north of our planet.
  The sun, after an absence of six months,  breaks the horizon for the first time.
  A female polar bear emerges from her den beneath the snow.
  The sun must be a welcome relief after so long in the darkness.
  Her den is on a high slope,  well away from hungry male bears who would kill her cubs,  but close enough to the sea ice where she can find food  for her extraordinary new family  three young cubs.
  If she can raise them all to independence,  it'll be a rare achievement.
  One of the cubs is underweight,  and will be fortunate to survive these early weeks.
  If the family reaches the sea ice, where the female can catch seals,  her milk will be enriched,  and the smaller cub will quickly gain size and strength.
  The sea ice, though, is a dangerous place.
  The male polar bear has been out on the frozen ocean all winter.
  Times have been lean,  and a bear cub would certainly make a welcome snack.
  However, the mainstay of his diet is seals,  and now is the time when they have their pups.
  The surface of the frozen sea is marked with pressure ridges,  and cracks created by the fluctuating tides.
  Both are good places to look for seals.
  He has detected a seal den beneath the ice.
  Now he must pin-point it, using only his extraordinary sense of smell.
  By treading lightly, he can avoid scaring his prey.
  He will need to punch through a metre of snow to reach the den,  and if his aim is not exactly on target,  the seal will certainly escape.
  In fact, the ringed seal abandoned her den  just a few hours ago  and her pup has climbed up onto the surface.
  It's more exposed up here, but it's easier to see an approaching bear.
  The pup is well camouflaged.
  Difficult to see when its mother has left it to go fishing.
  But he can still smell it.
  Nine out of ten polar bear hunts end in failure.
  The sun's warming effect on the Arctic is increasing  and the sea ice is showing the first signs of weakening.
  Inland, the northern rivers are still locked in ice.
  The frozen waterfalls are like dams  holding back billions of tonnes of fresh water  that has not moved for almost six months.
  The vast water shed lies motionless,  but as spring advances, it beings to stir.
  The frozen waterfalls start to weaken.
  Above them, the pressure is mounting.
  Now, from high above, whole sections can be seen to be on the move.
  The waterfalls are straining to hold back the force  that is building up above them.
  The dam bursts  and the river is unleashed.
  Millions of tonnes of ice grind their way downstream,  driven by the unstoppable force of the meltwater.
  Boulders and trees are plucked from the bank side.
  Within just a few days, the rivers of the north are all running.
  The Arctic's fresh water is flowing again.
  These vast floods contain 10% of the world's fresh water  and as they enter the ocean, they accelerate the break-up.
  Soon, an area of sea ice the size of Australia  will vanish from the Arctic Ocean.
  As the huge ice-sheet breaks up, wildlife returns to the North.
  The polar bear mother has made it to the edge of the sea-ice,  but the smallest cub is nowhere to be seen.
  It's a sad outcome,  but the disappearance improves the chances of the remaining two,  who now have more milk to share.
  Having led her cubs to the edge of the ice,  the mother's next challenge is to catch a seal.
  Not easy with these two in tow!  CUB GRUNTS  Her prey beneath the ice can detect the slightest vibration,  especially from bears.
  And this is not the stealthiest of hunting parties.
  BEAR GROWLS  Leaving her cubs behind however, is not an option  a male bear would eat one in a moment.
  This is not going to be easy.
  It seems that the cubs already see themselves as fearsome hunters,  but they're still young enough to accept their mother's discipline.
  It's the naughty corner for you!  This is not going to be their lucky morning.
  They saw no sign of a seal and the cubs are hungry again.
  The mother has been nursing for four months without once eating herself,  and now her milk is drying up.
  She must catch a seal soon, or the whole family will starve.
  The challenge of finding food is getting harder.
  She needs the sea-ice as a platform from which to hunt  and it's breaking up faster with each passing day.
  Even the ice around the coast is starting to break.
  The first cracks here are eagerly awaited by some  narwhals.
  The unicorns of the North are on a mission  to reach the new fishing grounds  in the bays that have been frozen-up all winter, but are now opening up.
  To get to them, the narwhals must travel down leads  temporary cracks in the ice.
  But these new roads could close at any time,  cutting off the air that they need to breathe.
  The road narrows until there's barely room for one-way traffic.
  Then, a surprise  narwhals coming from the other direction.
  It's a stand-off.
  Each team faces an armoury of sharp tusks.
  Finally, one side concedes  and everyone continues in the same direction.
  Within a week, the remaining bays break wide open,  and the narwhals turn their attention to social matters.
  No-one knows exactly what the narwhal's tusk is for.
  Some say it's used for fencing,  yet these exchanges are too gentle to be real fights.
  Perhaps these encounters  are to remind each animal of where it stands in Narwhal society.
  We may never know.
  Bizarre creatures appear as if from nowhere.
  The tiny plankton they eat have been fuelled by the increasing warmth  of the sun and fertilised by the nutrients  brought down by the great rivers and released from the melting sea-ice.
  Sea gooseberries strain the water with their stinging filaments,  their beating cilia scatter the sun's rays  into dazzling bursts of colour.
  Beneath the breaking sea ice, a predatory sea slug  flies through the water on translucent wings.
  It's on the trail of a peculiar swimming snail.
  And now the most voracious of the plankton-eaters  swim up from the depths  Arctic cod.
  SEAGULLS CRY  The shoals can be enormous, some containing 500 million fish  and predators travel hundreds of miles to feast on them.
  The cod harvest is THE annual event  for the birds and seals of the far North.
  For just a short period,  the combination of the strengthening sun, the newly-flowing rivers  and the breaking sea ice make the Arctic Ocean teem with life.
  The land is also transformed by the sun's heat.
  The small patches of bare ground that appear are darker than the snow  so they absorb more of the sun's energy.
  This accelerates the melt.
  The Arctic tundra is unveiled.
  By tracking the sun, Arctic poppies catch its rays around the clock,  so their flowers are always warmer than their surroundings.
  For early season insects, this warmth is even more valuable  than nectar if they're to stay active in the cold.
  The woolly bear caterpillar does not need the warmth from flowers  to kick-start its spring.
  It's always the first insect to appear after the snow retreats  and the story of how it does so is truly astonishing.
  At the start of spring, the caterpillar eats as fast as it can,  as indeed it must, for this far north, the season will be brief.
  The days shorten only too soon, but the caterpillar has not yet  got enough reserves to transform itself into a moth.
  It can't leave the Arctic, for it can't fly,  so it settles down beneath a rock.
  The sun's warmth rapidly dwindles.
  Beneath the rock, the caterpillar is out of the wind,  but the cold penetrates deep into the ground.
  Soon, its heart stops beating.
  It ceases to breathe, and its body starts to freeze  first its gut, then its blood.
  Spring.
  After four months of darkness, the Arctic begins to thaw.
  And the caterpillar rises from the dead.
  By the time the first shoots of willow appear  in the early spring, the woolly bear is already eating.
  But no matter how fast the woolly bear eats, it will not have time  to gather enough food this year, either,  and the cold closes in once again.
  Year after year, the caterpillar slows down in the autumn  and then freezes solid.
  But eventually, a very special spring arrives.
  This one will be its last.
  It's now 14 years old  the world's oldest caterpillar.
  Its remaining days now become frantic.
  It starts to weave a silk cocoon.
  Inside, its body is changing into one that can fly and search,  abilities that will be crucial in the days ahead.
  It's waited over a decade for this spring and now, its time is near.
  All across the Arctic, moths are emerging.
  After completing their 14-year preparation,  they now have just a few days to find a partner and mate.
  No life illustrates more vividly the shortness of the Arctic spring  or the struggle to survive in this most seasonal of places.
  As spring advances,  the transformation of the tundra continues.
  THEY SQUEAK  CHEEPING  Migrants begin arriving from the south  and suddenly the tundra is alive with birds and chicks.
  The Arctic's transformation is complete.
  This influx of life is good news for some permanent residents.
  Food is rarely plentiful out on the tundra.
  The Arctic wolves must make the most of this boom while it lasts.
  HONKING  The wolves must gather as much food as they can.
  Many miles from here, other members of the pack are relying on them.
  HOWLING  This barren landscape is a hard place to make a living,  forcing wolf packs to be smaller here than further south.
  Six hungry mouths to feed.
  The cubs are just over a month old.
  BARKING AND YELPING  The ducks are devoured instantly, but on the long journey home,  they also caught an Arctic hare, a mainstay of the tundra diet,  and one the cubs seem to be particularly keen on.
  Uneaten food is usually hidden for leaner times,  but there will be no leftovers today.
  The cubs are growing fast and are always hungry.
  GROWLING  The good times are certainly back, but these white wolves remind us  of the Arctic's less welcoming side.
  Their coats are pale to conceal them during the long, snowy winter.
  It's easy to forget that one month ago,  this land was a barren, white desert.
  At the southern end of our planet,  the Antarctic sea ice is still at its greatest extent.
  But there are a few islands on its outer edge  that the sea ice never quite reaches.
  South Georgia is washed by the rich waters of the Southern Atlantic  and the comparative warmth of the sea  takes the edge off the vicious southern winter.
  It's even possible for a few hardy animals,  like the Wandering Albatross, to live here throughout the whole year.
  The enormous Albatross chicks take 13 months to fledge,  so they have no choice but to sit here throughout the winter.
  It can't be easy, but the thick layer of fluffy down  keeps out the worst of the cold.
  Their parents travel thousands of miles to collect the fish  and squid they need to stay warm and to grow.
  The season is turning and storms blow in with little warning.
  King penguins have also been here all winter.
  Their chicks survive by huddling in creches to conserve their heat.
  A solitary bird here standing alone would quickly die of exposure.
  It seems for a hardy few, violent storms are a price worth paying  for year-round fishing in the rich waters of the southern ocean.
  The penguins have had the beach to themselves all winter,  but that is a luxury that will not last.
  As the winter storms subside, life begins to return.
  For half of the year, South Georgia has the greatest concentration  of sea birds in the world  and most of them arrive in the early spring.
  Macaroni penguins make the most impressive entrance  over five million pairs of them.
  They are the world's most numerous penguin  and half of them are now here.
  The arrival is complete.
  Courtship is next on South Georgia's busy spring schedule.
  The Wandering Albatross has the most elaborate display.
  MIXED-PITCH "POPPING"  These two are renewing their bonds after being months apart.
  Wanderers pair up in their teens  and can spend a further 50 years together  one of the longest partnerships in the animal world.
  By the middle of spring, the snows have cleared  from the coves and the low ground.
  The beaches are almost free of ice too,  but that isn't the biggest change facing the king penguins.
  Their peaceful waterfront has turned into an obstacle course of blubber.
  The elephant seals have arrived.
  This beach now contains a greater mass of animals  than any other in the world.
  The young seals were conceived here a year ago,  and now that they've been born,  their mothers are ready to mate again.
  The mating rights on this patch of the beach belong to a beach master.
  His harem contains 50 females  females that are coveted by others.
  His authority is being challenged.
  This rival means business.
  This could be the beach master's first serious test  of his spring campaign.
  The beach master himself weighs four tonnes,  but this rival is his equal.
  When these titans clash,  bones crunch.
  He has won the first battle,  but he may have to defend his harem every hour for the next month.
  If he can stay master of his beach for this period,  many of the young born here next year will be his.
  It's the end of spring on the Wandering Albatross's cliffs,  their season for fledging.
  Last year's chicks have lost their fluffy down  and step up to the challenge of getting into the air.
  SQUAWKING  An albatross is not very competent on the ground,  so until it can fly, it isn't good for much  and this makes the maiden flight  THE crucial event in an albatross's life.
  Managing the largest wing span in the world takes practice  lots of it.
  Weeks can go by like this.
  Certainly the winds must be right, but it does appear that for some,  the problem is something of a mental one.
  At last.
  The Southern Ocean beckons.
  This bird's feet will not touch land again for five years.
  1,000 miles further south,  on the edge of the Antarctic continent,  the sea ice is only just starting to break.
  But the Adelie penguin's activities are certainly warming up.
  The males have now finished their nests by fair means or foul  and the females are finally returning,  just as the weather is improving.
  Now their courtship can begin.
  RHYTHMIC CAWING  The eggs are laid and the females leave the job of incubating them  to the males, while they go fishing out on the fragmenting sea ice.
  Killer whales.
  It's teamwork that makes killer whales so dangerous.
  And THIS is a big team.
  There is no real need for the penguins to be alarmed.
  These killer whales are a kind that only eats fish.
  Rising out is simply the best way for the whales to work out  which cracks lead towards the coast and better fishing.
  A new generation of Adelies steps forth  into the short Antarctic spring  to be nurtured by industrious parents who've taken great risks  to give their young a head start.
  They will need to grow fast if they are to fledge  and leave before the freeze sets in again.
  It's a battle they will win or lose over the approaching summer.
  Next time,  summer and the sun never sets in the polar regions.
  The heat is on for the Frozen Planet.
  To film the entire breeding cycle of the Adelie penguin,  Frozen Planet sent a team to one of the world's largest colonies,  at Cape Crozier, Antarctica.
  I've heard so much about it and read so much about it.
  Finally we're going to get there.
 It's good.
  Cameraman Mark Smith and director Jeff Wilson  plan to spend the next four months living amongst the penguins  in a location first visited by the early explorers a century ago.
  So arduous was Scott's winter expedition to Cape Crozier  that it became known as "the worst journey in the world".
  Wow, it's fantastic!  Modern means make Mark and Jeff's journey a more comfortable affair,  but once there, they will be tested  to the very limits of their endurance.
  The pair arrive in early spring  with enough supplies to survive the next four  months working alone in the Antarctic wilderness.
  We're here!  Scott's legend of Cape Crozier tells of some extreme weather,  to say the least,  so Mark and Jeff take advantage of the clear conditions,  in the knowledge that the Adelies' arrival is imminent.
  But the next morning, things take a turn for the worse.
  We've just come up to this ridge  to go and check what it looks like down in the colony.
  ROARING  But even here you can hear  a huge kind of roaring noise  up on the hill.
 Never really heard anything like that before.
  Up there, it must be blowing the most almighty gale,  and that is, pff, you know, just a mile away or something.
  So that means that that could get here very, very quickly.
  So yeah, it makes you slightly scared.
 It's weird, isn't it?  The winds here are famously ferocious,  and with so little experience of this location,  Mark and Jeff retreat to the relative shelter of their hut.
  I was just stood here thinking, "Well, it can't be too bad,"  "because we haven't seen rocks starting to blow around yet,"  and just at that moment a rock took off and rolled down there.
  Oh, dear, it's getting stronger.
  By the second day of the storm, the winds reach 80 miles an hour,  and it's apparent that even getting lunch from the outside larder  is too risky.
  To their increasing alarm, the storm continues to build.
  All afternoon, it's been blowing about  must have been 100 miles an hour,  and in the last half-hour it's just got a lot stronger.
  Aside from being utterly terrified,  there's the added worry that our gear is stashed outside somewhere.
  We didn't have room for it in the hut,  and we don't know whether it's going to be there in the morning,  which could spell the end of our trip.
  On the third day of the storm, the winds hit 130 miles an hour.
  The hut starts to shake from its very foundations,  and Mark and Jeff's situation becomes critical.
  The wind's so strong,  it's constantly blowing the pilot light out on the paraffin stove,  so the temperature's dropping.
  The wind's rising.
 Sounds like the bloody roof's coming off.
  The really scary thing is that had we gone out down to the colony  and tried to film today,  there's a very high likelihood that we'd be dead by now.
  And I don't say that lightly.
  There's no way we would have seen this through down there.
  And that is quite sobering.
  After four terrifying days inside the hut,  the winds finally drop, and Mark and Jeff are keen to see  what, if any, equipment has survived.
  All the real important stuff, the camera stuff, is all still here,  and it's still strapped to this rock.
  You have no idea how much joy that gives us.
  We can get on with our jobs now!  The first things to welcome us to the colony are these skuas,  which come in and batter us from above.
  At its height, the colony will swell to over half a million penguins,  and in the 24-hour daylight of the Antarctic summer,  Mark and Jeff spend all of their waking hours filming.
  Unpredictable weather continues to force the team  to climb the two miles back to the relative shelter of their hut,  and Mark devises a novel way of testing the wind speed.
  Stop!  After six weeks, the first sign that the pair  might be tiring of their penguin neighbours.
  Over there's a leopard seal.
  It's the first non-penguin-looking animal in two months!  Will you look at that? It's a leopard seal!  I was down here filming the penguins coming in,  followed this penguin that came out of the waves up the beach,  very nice shot, stopped the shot  and there in the middle of the frame was this completely white penguin  trying to get into the shot.
  We suspect that he might be following us around now.
  Working around the clock for this length of time  in the presence of half a million screaming penguins  would test anyone's resolve.
  I hate carrying gear.
 Hear that? I hate carrying gear.
  I don't want to do it any more.
  Midway through their trip, after more than 1,000 hours amongst the penguins,  their grip on reality is beginning to loosen.
  Here we are on the penguin superhighway,  where the penguins go down to the sea.
  It seems that they follow the American system  driving on the right, going down to the sea on the right,  coming back from the sea on the left as you're facing the sea.
  I'm fairly sure that yesterday they were doing the British system.
  The legendary Cape Crozier weather soon snaps them back into reality.
  I'm just filming the penguins  with this huge kind of wind storm  coming over the ice cap,  the kind of thing we were warned about by the guy who was here before,  who has been here several years, saying "With  skies like this, you should run for home".
  But we're just going to stay and film it.
  Because we're the BBC!  But in this part of the world,  working for the BBC doesn't count for much.
  Within minutes, the winds reach hurricane strength,  and the crew are in serious trouble.
  So, we've got to now venture out and go about a mile up this valley,  which looks like it's got about 80mph winds blowing down it.
  So it's going to be quite an adventure.
  Bit frightening, though, really.
  After three months, the pair are now fully aware  of the strength the winds can reach.
 Getting a little stronger now!  There is a very real danger  that they could be separated and lost in these white-out conditions.
  We're going to go BLEEP.
  Two terrifying hours later, and their relief  at finally reaching the hut is tangible.
  THEY LAUGH  With a month still to go at Cape Crozier,  Mark, Jeff and the penguins will face many more storms like this.
  But it seems their greatest challenge  will be to maintain their sanity.
  Here we are, travelling through the Antarctic by sled.
  We're being pulled by a herd of huskies.
 Oh!  12 of them panting out front, breath steaming from their mouths.
  And as we go along,  we see the happy people waving at us.
  For a free Open University illustrated poster of polar regions,  call the number on the screen,  or order online by going to bbc.
co.
uk/frozenplanet  and follow the links to Open University.
 
                    1 Summer in the polar regions  and the sun never sets.
  Imagine a single day that lasts for months.
  Some polar animals will face great challenges  as their ice world vanishes around them.
  Others must use this special time wisely,  for summer's riches will not last.
  The summer is just beginning and the increasing power of the sun  is creating a spectacular new landscape.
  This melting ice sheet in the Arctic is 150 miles long  with a thousand waterfalls.
  Vast expanses of ice that were once stone-still have come to life.
  The polar bear's world is melting away under the constant summer sun.
  As the season advances,  the frozen surface of the ocean disintegrates.
  Soon, the ice here will have totally vanished.
  The polar bear family have to adapt to their rapidly changing home.
  For the two cubs, this is a whole new watery world.
  It's the first time they have seen the sea-ice break up.
  They're only six months old  and will be dependent on their mother for another two years.
  They have much to learn.
  Their first swimming lesson,  and they're not sure that they want it.
  For their mother, swimming is second nature.
  But the cubs still prefer to have ice beneath their feet whenever they can.
  Soon, it will be impossible to avoid the water.
  This lone male has lived through a dozen summers  and is perfectly at home in the sea.
  He can swim up to 50 miles a day.
  He's hungry and he's searching this ice maze for seals.
  But travelling across this increasingly fragile ice-scape  is hard work for an animal weighing over half a ton.
  It's also harder to hunt when you have to swim.
  In open water, the odds are in the seals' favor.
  Lean months lie ahead for the polar bears.
  They will have to adopt new hunting strategies or risk starvation.
  The northern part of the earth is now tilting towards the sun  and all around the Arctic the sea-ice continues its retreat.
  The last remnants of the ice-world drift with the wind and the tides.
  The sun's heat may be gentle at these latitudes,  but it is continuous for 24 hours a day  and it carves the ice into magical shapes.
  Those that need ice have to visit the glacier fronts to find it.
  A comfortable bed is hard to come by.
  A polar bear's fur is so dense that water is easily shaken off.
  And ice absorbs water like a towel.
  That's better!  There's now little chance of catching seals  and this bear may not eat again until the end of summer.
  It's better to save energy and doze in the sun.
  The warmth of the sun's rays is now bringing the Arctic lands back to life.
  Red phalaropes.
  They've flown all the way from the tropics  to feed in these rich Arctic waters.
  They stir up the tiny creatures that are now flourishing here  with a special spinning dance.
  All excellent fuel, as they hurry to rear the next generation.
  The Arctic terns have made an even longer journey to breed here.
  They have flown 11,000 miles from the Antarctic.
  Their newly hatched chicks will need to grow fast  if they're to accompany their parents  when they return south in only six weeks' time.
  An eider duck has chosen to nest in the center of the tern colony,  hardly a tranquil place to raise your young.
  But the noisy neighbors have a feisty attitude to life  and that can be very valuable.
  A hungry bear looking for a meal  can destroy hundreds of nests in a single raid.
  Defensive squadrons of terns take off immediately.
  Sharp beaks stab down from above.
  The bear has nothing in his armory that can cope with this.
  The terns have drawn blood from his muzzle.
  He leaves, in search of an easier meal.
  The eiders survive thanks to their choice of neighbors.
  And the ducklings begin their sprint to maturity.
  Fishing continues around the clock  as the terns race to rear their young before the return of the freeze.
  So the rich waters of summer fuel the breeding of all these visitors  and enable them to build up the reserves they will need  for the long return journey south.
  Inland, the winter snows have gone, revealing a vast, treeless wilderness.
  The male snowy owl is finding plenty of lemmings to bring to his mate.
  But they're not just for her.
  She is brooding their rather scruffy young.
  She tears the meal into beak-sized chunks  that the owlets can swallow whole.
  Each of them can eat two lemmings a day.
  The male has no time to rest.
  Over the course of the summer, he will have to provide his family  with over a thousand lemmings.
  The hungry owlets keep the adults working around the clock.
  The arctic summer may be short but the days are long.
  Everyone must take advantage of the 24-hour daylight,  none more so than the owls' tiny neighbors,  the Lapland buntings.
  Both parents feed their growing family continuously.
  A mere 10 days after hatching  and they will all have left in record time.
  The last needs a little encouragement.
  The owlets have also left their nest  and turned into football-sized balls of fluff.
  But they still depend on their parents for food and protection.
  A skua.
  Their mother's talons are her best weapons.
  The owlets are dangerously exposed out on the tundra,  so they must hurry to change from balls of fluff  to fully-feathered adults.
  And to do that they need more lemmings.
  A lemming doesn't last long these days.
  Times are harder for the wolves here in the high Arctic.
  The cubs are now six weeks old and increasingly hungry.
  The adults have to struggle to feed their growing family.
  Somewhere on this vast expanse of tundra  there must be larger prey.
  Musk oxen are on the move.
  They're heading into the valleys, where the brief summer rains  will produce fresh grazing.
  This is an opportunity that must be seized,  even if it means travelling 80 miles in a day.
  Their task is a formidable one.
  Musk oxen are immensely powerful  and their sharp horns can kill.
  A heavily armored bull would be an unwise choice.
  Even two wolves would find it a struggle to bring it down.
  A calf.
  Much easier.
  The two wolves work together to split the herd and isolate their victim.
  It seems that the wolf cubs will at last eat well.
  But the herd regroups.
  The cavalry ride to the rescue.
  The whole herd encircles the calf with a protective wall of horns.
  For the musk oxen, it's all for one and one for all.
  For the wolves, another attack would be not only futile but dangerous.
  They have spent a lot of energy  and have nothing whatever to show for it.
  Their failure will be felt most keenly back at the den.
  They have nothing to take back to the family.
  The pack are forced to move on in search of better hunting.
  They must find something soon  in this vast wilderness to feed their growing family.
  The brief Arctic summer is almost over.
  At the southern end of the planet, the long summer days transform life,  just as they do in the north, but the cast here is very different.
  King penguins.
  A parent, returning with food, must recognize its chick's call  amongst a chorus of 400,000 birds.
  Huge colonies like this one  are found all along the north coast of South Georgia.
  King penguins are active throughout the long summer days,  so they have to deal with an uncharacteristic polar problem.
  By midday, the temperature can reach a sizzling 17 degrees centigrade.
  Any effort can lead to overheating.
  It's best not to overexert oneself.
  The heavily insulated penguins stretch out  so their naked feet can cool in the breeze.
  Their gigantic neighbors use a different approach.
  Wet sand cools the backs of these elephant seals  and also acts as a sunscreen.
  The chicks, in their downy coats that have kept them warm all winter,  are in even greater danger of overheating.
  It will be two months before they can swim properly,  but a dip in the shallow river brings a little relief.
  There is, however, another way to cool the blood.
  This murky pool has become a penguin spa.
  It's a great way to cool the feet, but there is no reason to stop there.
  You can indulge yourself with the full treatment.
  Mud, glorious mud!  For the fully feathered adults,  there's a cleaner, more invigorating option.
  The bracing waters of the Southern Ocean.
  The 100-mile long island of South Georgia  lies on the northern fringe of Antarctica.
  Ice-free all year, its rich coastal waters  make it a popular breeding destination for all beach lovers.
  In summer, 95% of the world's population of Antarctic fur seals come here.
  Packed tightly together,  they form one of the densest gatherings of marine mammals on Earth.
  The island's beaches are filling fast and will soon be crammed  with five million of these summer visitors.
  Space is at a premium, as every female needs a dry patch of sand  the size of a beach towel for herself.
  And for good reason.
  Virtually all of them give birth within just 10 days.
  It's crucial to establish a strong bond with your baby  in such a crowded colony.
  The pups grow quickly on rich, high-fat milk.
  After giving birth, the females are ready to mate,  so each male guards up to 15 of them in his small patch of beach.
  A bull may only hold a territory for one season in his entire life.
  So, when a challenger arrives, he will risk everything to retain it.
  Their sharp teeth inflict terrible injuries.
  Many bulls die from exhaustion after these fights.
  In the heat of the battle, the pups are also in real danger.
  The defeated bull makes his escape,  but the colony still suffers from the side-effects of the battle.
  Many of the pups get lost in the violence and confusion.
  This time, there is a happy ending.
  As summer progresses,  even more of the Southern Ocean is gradually opening up.
  The summer melt, as it moves south,  arrives first at the Antarctic Peninsula,  the most northern tip of the continent.
  As the ice retreats, a dramatic 500-mile-long coastline  is revealed for the first time in seven months.
  This new seascape is home to one of the most numerous mammals on the planet.
  Crabeater seals,  over 15 million live here amongst the drifting ice floes.
  They owe their existence here to living organisms so small  you might hardly notice them.
  The underside of the sea-ice is stained by algae.
  These microscopic plants  support the most important Antarctic creatures of all.
  Krill.
  They have been grazing on the algal layer throughout the winter.
  As the ice melts, more of the algae are released into the water.
  Both algae and krill flourish in the summer sun.
  The krill collect the algae in the sieve-like basket  formed by the interlocking hairs between their front legs.
  There are 300 million tons of krill in the Southern Ocean,  with a greater combined weight than that of any other animal on the planet.
  Almost all the animals of the Antarctic depend on krill,  including its giants.
  Humpback whales.
  They drive the krill to the surface  and then strain it from the water with the baleen sieves in their mouths.
  Humpbacks often feed in teams, so the overspill from one huge mouth  can be collected by another just behind.
  The abundance of krill attracts other visitors  to the peninsula in the summer.
  Antarctic minke whales.
  Their pointed heads and short dorsal fins give them speed and endurance.
  And they need both.
  There are other whales here, too.
  Killers!  This is an extended family of mothers and their young.
  And a male with a huge dorsal fin almost two meters high.
  A lone minke whale.
  It's just what this group of killer whales are looking for.
  Working as a team, as they have done for decades,  they fan out across the strait in search of their quarry.
  And they've found it.
  The minke races away, pursued by outriders on each flank.
  Terrified, the minke heads for the shore.
  It's so desperate to escape it almost beaches itself.
  It makes a desperate break for freedom.
  Two hours and 20 miles later,  the minke is still alive and swimming strongly.
  It's only real defense is its endurance.
  But the killers work as a team,  with fresh ones replacing the outriders in relays.
  And as the minke tires, the battering and the biting begins.
  Sea birds are attracted by the smell of fresh blood rising from the water.
  The killers try to flip the minke over.
  If they can manage to keep its blowhole underwater,  it will drown.
  One forces the minke's whole body down below the surface.
  And then, the final strike.
  The team drag the minke under for the last time  and the hunters, finally, can feed.
  As the summer advances, the most southerly stretches  of the Antarctic Ocean are released from the ice.
  AdÃ©lie penguins have been feeding in the open ocean.
  The most southerly of all penguins,  they're returning to the Antarctic continent  with stomachs full of krill.
  The sea-ice has finally retreated all the way back to the beach,  so the walk back to the colony is as short as it will ever be,  crucial for the half million penguins here  who are hurrying to raise their chicks before the freeze returns.
  Most of the pairs have two chicks to care for.
  Each chick requires nearly 30 kilograms of food before it's fully grown.
  Most of their catch is krill  and AdÃ©lie penguins consume a staggering  one and a half million tons of it a year.
  There are no land-based predators in Antarctica.
  The threat here comes from the skies.
  A South Polar skua.
  An unguarded chick is an easy catch.
  Nothing can save the chick now.
  But now the parents can focus all their attention on the second.
  Only half of these chicks will survive to adulthood.
  But there are thousands more parents with young in this huge colony.
  Parents that cannot rest,  for their young must be fit and strong  if they're to survive the dangers that autumn will bring.
  In summer, the frozen oceans melt  and the polar animals disperse to feed amongst the broken ice.
  So, even finding them in this vast expanse of sea  and drifting ice floes wouldn't be easy.
  In the Arctic, the aim was to get close to a polar bear family  and film them in this fast-melting world.
  Firstly, the team had to use a ship capable of breaking through the pack ice  around the 2,000-mile-long coastline of Svalbard.
  Producer Miles Barton and cameraman Ted Giffords  are checking out fjords known to be frequented by bears.
  We've just seen a bear that was walking around  in front of a glacier over there.
  We've just arrived, so this is kind of a test more than anything,  but we're going to go and see if we can film it.
  We're seeing how smoothly we can make this operation work.
  Stay on Channel Six.
 Can you give me directions to the bear, please?  The plan is that the team's stabilized aerial camera,  now fitted to the speedboat,  will give perfectly stable shots of the bear swimming.
  Spin this around or we'll lose it.
  The fellow's over here, yeah?  - Got him, yeah.
 - I can't get any tighter.
  You shoot it?  Wahey!  - That's nice.
 - Nice sparkle, nice liquid look.
  - Going to let him go.
 - Okay, cut.
  After their initial success,  the weather takes a turn for the worse.
  We're used to the Baja.
  For five days, there are no more polar bears to be found.
  The captain decides to take a break and parks up in the pack ice.
  But after all that fruitless searching by the crew, a bear visits them.
  A large and inquisitive adult male.
  So, the team decides to follow him.
  The open water between boat and bear  means the crew can safely film from surprisingly close range  without disturbing him.
  That's nice.
 Oops.
  The bear is so relaxed  he even begins to hunt right alongside them.
  He's looking for a seal inside.
  But he's just completely ignoring us.
  Just hold it there.
 Just hold it there for a minute.
  He's going to climb up.
 Ready?  That's a big bear.
  That's pretty good, pretty good.
  The closest we've been to a polar bear so far.
  Despite this remarkably close encounter,  the team still wants to film a family of bears.
  These female and two cubs to starboard side.
  She's at two  There's good news on the radio.
  - Oh, there's a cub.
 - Yeah, I've seen the cubs.
  They're looking straight at us.
 Look at that.
 That's amazing.
  As the mother looks distinctly hungry,  they will need to keep at least 15 feet of open water between her and the boat.
  Having a good look at us.
  Oh, look at them, look at the cubs.
  Yeah.
  Jason, just go when you need to.
  Oh, here she comes.
 Bloody hell.
  Mother bears are always desperate for food for their cubs,  so the crew could be the perfect supper.
  She's getting in.
  Oh, my God, she's going to go in the water there.
  The 15-footgap was just enough.
  That was amazing.
  Hands are freezing.
  - We have to go.
 - Okay.
  Do you want to get close up to the cubs?  Still rolling.
 Yeah, that's cute.
  She's going in the water, okay.
  And water and then Stay with the cubs.
  Okay, the cubs for a nice splash.
  Go on, cubs.
 Yeah! Hooray! Well done, well done.
  Great stuff.
  She looked like she wanted to get in the boat once or twice.
  Sometimes it's quite shocking to actually look up from the monitor  and realize they're about 15 feet away from you.
  But a lovely family group.
  The boat-based camera has helped to get remarkably close shots  of the bear family.
  But how would it cope in the more extreme conditions  of the Southern Ocean?  Another Frozen Planet team headed south.
  The plan is to use the same camera system to film the hunting strategy  of the most spectacular marine predators in Antarctica.
  Killer whales.
  The team enlisted the help of scientists Bob Pitman and John Durban.
  They had put satellite tags on the whales  and so could locate them for the camera team.
  Doug Allan operates the camera rig from the wheelhouse,  while Doug Anderson films from the deck.
  - Yeah, there.
 See it? - It just surfaced right with them.
  Okay, there's a killer whale at 11 o'clock,  about 200 meters, heading towards those two seals on the floe.
  - Good.
 - This could be really good.
  At last, having tracked the group for several days,  the whales look as if they are about to hunt.
  Yeah, they're going to go in for it.
  There it goes!  Four whales here.
  Um, two adult females, a juvenile and a big adult male.
  Swimming in formation,  the killers create a wave to wash the seal off the floe.
  It's all pretty intense.
  Oh, another wave.
  - Yes, we have - Wave.
  - Wow! - Yeah, he's in the water.
  Having successfully filmed several hunts  with the boat-based cameras from above,  the team are keen to see what's happening underwater.
  Only one way to find out!  Time to launch the dinghy.
  Doug Anderson approaches the seal and the killers  with an underwater camera mounted on a pole.
  For the first time, the team can see how the whales create the killer wave.
  There it is.
  The underwater camera also reveals  surprisingly cautious behavior by the whales.
  They seem wary of being bitten by the much smaller seal.
  And they even blow bubbles to confuse it.
  They're so cautious with the seals.
  You know, at the end of the day, the seal's got a big mouth full of teeth  and these whales just don't take risks.
  Having dealt with the seal,  the whales turn their attention to the dinghy.
  First, they get right up close for a better look at Doug.
  Then, they line up to create the kind of wave  that washed the seal off the floe.
  Oh!  For a moment, the crew get an uncomfortably close seal's eye view  of this remarkable hunting strategy.
  Look at that, look.
  See that, Bob? The juvies are making waves.
  It's a great feeling being there, being so close to the behavior,  actually having the water coming into the boat.
  From our point of view, you know,  it's all about trying to get the feeling of being with these whales,  and with these whales, there's no bother with that because they're so confident.
  They just want to be all around you and checking you out.
  I mean, I can't imagine that I'm going to have  another experience like this in my career.
  These come along rarely, and you just feel happy and lucky when they do come.
  You just don't get better days than that.
 
                    The end of the Arctic summer, and the sun hasn't set for three months.
  It's hard to imagine the bitter cold will soon return.
  Some will welcome the chills of autumn, but for most,  time is running out before they will have to retreat to the south.
  Early autumn in the Canadian Arctic,  and polar bears are gathering on the coastal strip,  waiting for the sea to freeze.
  But a life spent alone on the sea ice  is no preparation for a crowded beach.
  Such close contact with other bears must be stressful.
  Surely tempers will flare.
  Over half a tonne of bear slams into the other.
  Polar bears will fight to the death over mates,  but not in autumn.
  Now these fearsome predators display  a surprisingly tolerant side to their natures.
  Being marooned on land means the bears no longer have access  to the seals they usually hunt  and they have to scrape by on whatever they can find.
  Like bears the world over, they're not choosy feeders.
  They even turn vegetarian,  delicately picking out berries from between the thorns.
  There are plenty to go around  so there's no need to squabble over them.
  Any fighting is just for fun.
  The bears select sparring partners who are well-matched  and they always pull their punches,  no-one wants to get hurt in a play-fight.
  Perhaps these bouts are a way of testing rivals  in case they ever meet again out on the sea ice.
  One thing's for sure, the famous loners  are revealing a social, playful side we rarely see.
  It's all just boisterous fun but with so many big males around,  the females keep their cubs at a safe distance.
  The wary mother will lead her young to a quieter beach  along the coast while she waits for the ocean to freeze.
  The sea ice is now at its minimum extent.
  In the Canadian Arctic, vast stretches of coastline  are now unlocked and ready to receive visitors.
  Belugas  the white whales of the North.
  They're relying on open water to reach an ancient rendezvous.
  This one is only a month old,  and won't turn white for another five years.
  Thousands of belugas are being drawn to one special estuary  in the Canadian Arctic.
  It isn't food that brings them here.
  Curiously, it's personal hygiene.
  When the tide is low they swim into the shallows  and flail around with great enthusiasm.
  They're after a body scrub.
  The gravel acts as a loofah  and thrashing their bodies across it  helps to get rid of their old skin.
  Presumably the treatment keeps them clean and streamlined,  but it also appears to feel good.
  Bliss!  The water in the estuary is warmer and less salty  and that seems to soften the skin making the scrub more effective.
  This secluded estuary is only a temporary whale spa,  the ocean will soon freeze again forcing the whales to travel south.
  Vast seabird colonies are the jewels of the Arctic.
  Brunnich's guillemots have spent the summer months packed together  on vertical cliffs beyond the reach of predators.
  They are among the most numerous seabirds in the Northern hemisphere.
  This colony alone contains 100,000 birds  and there are many more like it all along the Arctic coastline.
  In just a few weeks these cliffs will empty  but before the guillemots can leave, their chicks must fledge.
  Their feathers are now fully formed, but their stubby wings  are still too short for them to fly properly  this will be a challenge.
  It's a 150 metre drop and they need to make it all the way to the sea.
  Here goes.
  He falls short and survives the crash landing.
  The chicks are manna from heaven for an Arctic fox.
  The next chick is accompanied by a parent.
  Failed again.
  This looks better!  Success!  Aquatic landings are certainly gentler  and foxes can't reach you out here.
  The chicks will stay in their parents' care for another month.
  The guillemots are not the only ones preparing to leave,  all across the Arctic millions of summer visitors  are beginning to return south.
  The guillemot chicks can't fly yet,  so they and their families must swim to their winter feeding grounds.
  It's a journey that will take them a thousand miles south  to the open ocean and away from the approaching ice.
  The breeding season is over and silence returns to the Arctic.
  But as the first storms of autumn  sweep through the deserted nesting grounds,  they bring an unexpected bonanza for the few that remain.
  The discovery doesn't remain secret for long.
  It's a huge fin whale carcass.
  The polar bears have been drawn from several miles away,  guided by their extraordinary sense of smell.
  Bears are arriving all the time,  but there's plenty of room at this 18 metre long dining table.
  They're surprisingly relaxed,  but with enough for everyone there's no need to argue.
  The tastiest morsels are often underwater.
  Others prefer some greens with their dinner.
  After a well-balanced meal,  there's nothing better than some good company.
  Despite their reputation as loners,  it's surprising just how sociable polar bears can be.
  All across the Arctic the temperature is now dropping  and the sea is beginning to freeze.
  Every day over 20,000 square miles of ocean  turn to ice as the cold spreads south.
  At first, a thin, greasy film appears on the surface  Next, pancakes of ice start to appear.
  The pancakes lock together and form a continuous sheet.
  The Arctic Ocean is freezing again.
  At last the bear family can return to the sea ice where they belong.
  It's been six months since the cubs first emerged from the den.
  They've survived the hazards of melting sea ice in spring  and lack of food in summer  and now, at last, they are in their element again.
  As the north of our planet turns away from the sun,  the big chill travels south.
  Temperatures on the tundra start to fall.
  The shorter days and colder nights trigger a dramatic change  in the willows and blueberry bushes.
  They stop producing green pigment that harnesses the sun's energy  and red and yellow pigments build up in their leaves.
  The tundra blazes with colour and the whole landscape is transformed.
  A bull musk ox marks his territory with scent from glands on his face.
  He's preparing for the breeding season.
  He shadows his harem of females as they graze  the last of the summer grasses.
  He must be on his guard.
  An outsider is arriving,  a large male whose intentions soon become clear.
  The newcomer circles the resident bull warily.
  The resident must take up the intruder's challenge.
  This clash of Polar Titans could easily become a fight to the death.
  The impact is like a car crash at 30 miles an hour.
  A heavy skull and a helmet of horn four inches thick  provides some protection for the musk ox's brain.
  Over the next half hour, the advantage ebbs and flows  as each tries to finish the duel.
  If one can turn the other and gore its flank, the fight will be over.
  The stakes rise as the risk of injury, or even death, increases.
  The rival is out-manoeuvred.
  And the champion returns to his females.
  By now most animals have migrated south, but the musk oxen,  with their thick coats, will stay and face the approaching winter.
  As autumn progresses, the moisture in the air freezes  and hoarfrost decorates the leaves.
  Ice crystals grow like diamonds on every twig.
  All across the tundra, both the rivers and the ground freeze solid.
  Glassy cathedrals form as the remaining water  becomes locked up as ice.
  Soon even the largest waterfalls will be motionless.
  The tundra has been transformed once again.
  It appears deserted.
  Caribou on their migration.
  Unlike the musk ox, caribou do head south for the winter,  but it's a long and difficult journey.
  They use the frozen lakes as ice roads  these are flat and firm  but it seems hooves and ice were never really meant to go together.
  The frisky males would be well advised to keep  at least one eye on the road as the mating season begins.
  A cow is being closely guarded by a mature bull,  with his much larger antlers.
  The females are busy feeding-up for the winter,  but the bull has other things on his mind.
  The cow is playing hard to get.
  She heads off with her admirer in pursuit.
  Several other bulls join in the chase.
  She's out in front but the amorous males are gaining on her.
  The big bull breaks off his chase to deal with a rival.
  But now he's fallen behind the other challengers.
  The younger bulls, with their lighter antlers,  keep up with the cow more easily,  but as the pace slows, the older bull catches up.
  Again he has to stop and fight.
  A decisive victory for the big male.
  He's earned the respect of the vanquished bulls  and they now trail in his wake.
  It's now become a game of Grandma's footsteps,  one look from the boss and the young-bloods freeze in their tracks.
  The exhausted bull guards his prize, but he'll need to recover  before he is able to make the most of his victory,  and the herd continues its journey south  to avoid the worst of the advancing cold.
  From the ocean to the tundra,  the north of our planet is now completely frozen.
  The Antarctic.
  In the far south, autumn can be a particularly savage  and unpredictable time.
  South Georgia is a splinter of rock in the middle  of the vast Southern Ocean.
  It's only a hundred miles long and is battered by the elements.
  This ocean generates some of the largest waves on the planet,  they gain size and power as they travel around the globe,  uninterrupted by land for 12,000 miles.
  As they buffet South Georgia, they also bring food.
  A seal carcass.
  A prize worth braving the surf for.
  Giant petrels are the vultures of Antarctica,  and are always the first to the spoils.
  The word is out, and the hordes move in.
  Like feathered dinosaurs they lock beaks in battle.
  These butchers provide a service for some unlikely meat-eaters.
  With the carcasses now opened, pintail ducks arrive for a meal.
  There's plenty of good food here and none of South Georgia's  inhabitants can afford to be fussy with winter looming.
  After the feast it's time for a rinse and spin.
  The breeding season is finally over  and the petrels will soon be heading out to sea  to avoid the worst of the winter.
  A snowstorm is an omen of things to come.
  There is now little left to eat and South Georgia's beaches  will soon be abandoned to the cold and ice.
  Further south still,  and the first storms are striking the continent of Antarctica.
  The Adelie penguins must rear their half grown chicks  to adulthood before winter hits in just a few weeks' time.
  The chicks are only three weeks old.
  Their downy coats aren't fully waterproof yet  and they cluster together for warmth.
  These creches are essential during bad weather  as most of the adults are away at sea,  fishing for their fast growing families.
  When the parents return,  their offspring quickly leave the comfort of their peers.
  Both chicks are ravenously hungry.
  But there may only be enough food for one.
  This race could determine which chick has the better prospects.
  Most Adelie pairs will only manage to raise a single chick each season.
  And this may not be it.
  At least number one is getting stronger by the day.
  With one meal delivered, the parents must quickly find another.
  To rear their chicks before the onset of winter,  the penguins must work round the clock.
  The parents can travel over 100 miles  to reach the best fishing grounds  and may be gone for several days at a time.
  They return with a kilogram of fish and squid in their bellies,  feed their chicks, and then go off again to repeat the process.
  The job must be finished before the sea freezes over again.
  At seven-weeks-old, the chicks are losing the last of their baby down,  and are now fully equipped to take the plunge.
  Confidence is all that's lacking.
  Perhaps it'll help if the parents lead by example.
  There effortless, and as graceful as any fish.
  It seems penguins are not born with a love of water.
  Staying submerged is the next problem.
  Buoyancy control is clearly a skill that needs practise.
  Well, it's a start(!)  And at least they can now reach the ice floes.
  Swimming is the first of many lessons.
  They must next learn to recognise danger in all its forms.
  A leopard seal.
  Even high up on an ice floe, the penguins aren't safe.
  Each year, leopard seals will take 5,000 of them  from this colony alone.
  The Adelies that survive drift out into the Southern Ocean.
  They will spend the next five months feeding at sea,  avoiding the great freeze that is about to envelop Antarctica.
  The edge of the sea ice advances by up to two and a half miles a day.
  Eventually, over 5 million square miles of ice  will surround the continent of Antarctica,  effectively doubling its size.
  The great white wilderness is empty.
  But not for long.
  Bizarrely, it's now that the Emperor penguins arrive,  just as all the other penguins have left.
  These giants are now at their heaviest.
  They've been feeding at sea all summer and can weigh 40 kilos.
  From the edge of the sea ice, they head towards their colony  but an obstacle course of jumbled ice blocks stands in their way.
  The males are particularly fat at this time of year.
  This will be crucial for their survival in the months ahead,  but it doesn't make squeezing through narrow gaps any easier(!)  With the worst behind them,  they start a 20 mile march into the freezer to breed.
  The only animals to do so.
  By tobogganing they can travel at twice their walking speed  and it takes the weight off tired feet.
  Their destination is the thicker ice, closer to shore,  which will stay solid long enough for them to safely rear their chicks  throughout the months to come.
  Their colony is in the lee of icebergs trapped in the frozen ocean  which will shelter them from the bitter Antarctic winds.
  Newly formed pairs promenade together.
  Courtship demands that both partners strike and hold a variety of poses.
  It's an important process as the bond between the couple  will have to be an exceptionally strong one.
  The final act lacks the elegance of the prelude  but at least it's quick.
  The egg is laid a few days later.
  It contains the female's last reserves.
  She now has nothing more to give  and must pass the egg to the male to incubate.
  The couple must be quick.
  If the egg rests on the ice for too long it'll freeze.
  With their eggs safe in the care of the males,  the females start the long journey back to the sea.
  The sun is also leaving and will be gone for many months.
  The precious eggs, balanced on the males' feet,  will make the terrible ordeal ahead worthwhile.
  With no food and only each other for warmth,  they will attempt to keep the next generation alive  while surviving in the most brutal conditions on earth.
  Not all of them will succeed.
  At both ends of our planet,  the sun sets for the last time in autumn.
  A season of change comes to an end  and one of endless darkness and bitter cold begins.
  Next time, winter in the poles.
  The harshest and coldest conditions on earth.
  Ice takes a grip of the frozen planet.
  The spectacular return of the Emperor penguins  was a key event for the Frozen Planet team.
  The crew will have to operate  in the most dangerous of all polar environments  the edge of the sea ice.
  They have to fly in everything they'll need for a month  of living on the frozen ocean.
  On board are slow motion cameraman John Aitchison.
  Underwater cameraman Didier Noirot.
  And director Chadden Hunter.
  With the plane gone, the team are on their own.
  This is home for the next month.
  But it doesn't look like much right now.
  Their tents should be secure on the permanent sea ice  but they're still miles from the ocean where they hope to film.
  The locals are keen to get acquainted  with anything of a familiar shape and size.
  The Emperors are welcome neighbours around camp,  but the team need to film them returning from the water  and to do that they face a daunting task.
  They must find a path to the open sea  through a shifting landscape of jagged sea ice.
  Their first scouting trip doesn't look promising.
  Neither maps nor Sat Nav help in this ever-changing environment.
  The only clue that the ocean lies somewhere to the east  is a steady procession of penguins.
  Any suggestions, Didier? We must find a way.
  Yes.
 And we will find a way.
  I like the attitude.
 The penguins have found a way.
  It seems the Emperors will be the key to reaching the ice edge.
  OK, let's go.
  With their penguin guides leading the way,  snowmobiles are brought in to haul 500kgs of equipment  through the icy maze.
  It's tough going for film crew and penguins.
  When the ice ridges halt progress,  it's time for some back-breaking work.
  The next three days are spent chiselling through mile after mile  of broken sea ice.
  Once finally clear of the ice boulders,  they spot their goal  a patch of open ocean with penguins.
  John is first in position.
  He hopes to capture the most striking images  by using a computerised slow motion camera.
  But attempts to film the penguins underwater are halted  by an unwelcome visitor.
  We just saw the head of a massive leopard seal  so we'll get closer to see what's going on.
  We must be careful because those guys can come out very quickly,  out of the hole, and give a bite,  but being red like that, we should be quite protected, you know?  Being dressed in red may be Didier's idea of safety,  but the rest of the crew have a healthy respect for leopard seals.
  They can be fiercely territorial and are not afraid to attack humans.
  I think I can run faster than him on land.
  That's very exciting.
  That's the first time I've ever seen a leopard seal in my life  and he's come straight out of the hole and starts  walloping towards us.
  There's a lot of adrenalin.
  With the seal frightening the penguins away  and hassling the crew, it's time to try a new hole.
  Oh, hello.
  Can you see him?  While the seal's around, there's little hope of filming the penguins,  but now a far greater threat is posed by the changing weather.
  That dark headland in the distance is Cape Washington.
  That's our last sign of mainland.
 We can't see anything else.
  Once we lose sight of that mainland  that means we're out here on our own on the sea ice.
  This visibility is getting lower and lower.
  It's started snowing and this wind is just blowing off shore  so, if all this ice heads out, we don't want to be on it.
  I think we're going to can filming for the day.
  All the signs suggest that a big Antarctic storm is on its way.
  Winds pick up to 70mph and everyone retreats to their tents.
  High winds then turn to heavy snow.
  On the driest continent on Earth, a big snowfall is rare.
  White-out conditions take the penguins and film crew by surprise.
  Each day they must dig out their buried equipment.
  Filming has ground to a halt.
  One week and a metre of snow later, the headland is visible again  and the team are raring to get back to the ice edge.
  They follow their old route back through the frozen maze  and, with no leopard seal in sight,  it's time for another attempt with the pole cam.
  It's cumbersome, but it allows the team to capture underwater images  without having to risk the icy water themselves.
  That is OK? That's perfect.
 They are coming.
 I can see some.
  Oh, wow!  Penguins coming in the hole.
 This is awesome.
 This is great.
  The aim now is to film the penguins' dramatic exit from the hole.
  The only problem which hole?!  These penguins keep outsmarting us.
  We tried to switch holes to film them coming up  and they all just completely came up behind us.
  Whatever the crew try there's always someone who hasn't read the script!  John has been filming but he can't view his slow motion shots  until they're downloaded to a computer.
  While he waits, Didier seizes his chance.
  Come, my friend.
 Come.
  If you can't beat them, join them.
  It's time to go scuba diving in the coldest waters on the planet.
  I will see you on the other side.
  The team are 300 miles from help  and have only a small hole as their lifeline to the surface.
  A magical world opens up.
  For the first time  Didier now shares the penguins' perspective from beneath the ice.
  This is Antarctica at its most enchanting.
  For Chadden, after weeks of struggle,  the sequence quite literally falls into his lap.
  Whoa!  Sorry!  I think I'm in the way.
  Just come a little this way.
 There we go.
  I'm getting run over by penguins(!)  I think it worked.
 It's very difficult to tell.
  John's camera is finally capturing  the super slow motion images of the Emperors' dramatic return.
  With the penguins performing perfectly  it was all falling into place.
  The team were finally able to capture  Antarctica's most spectacular belly flop.
  For a free Open University illustrated poster of polar regions  call the number on the screen  or order online by going to bbc.
co.
uk/frozenplanet  and follow the links to Open University.
 
                    1 The polar winter.
  This is the planet at its most hostile.
  Those that stay here at this time must face the harshest conditions on Earth.
  The high Arctic in late autumn,  empty and abandoned to ice and snow.
  Most animals migrated south weeks ago.
  The few that stay will face violent winds,  plunging temperatures and months of darkness.
  A female polar bear searches for shelter.
  Other bears are out on the frozen ocean looking for food  but she won't feed again until next spring.
  Using as little energy as possible, she starts to dig a shallow nest.
  The snow here is easy to work.
  It's soft and light,  a sure sign that soon plenty more will accumulate on this slope,  as winter advances.
  And that is what she needs.
  If she has chosen well, the Arctic wind will do much of her work for her.
  Once the snow here is deep enough,  she will dig down to make a den.
  She'll then lie, waiting for her cubs to be born as winter sets in.
  The sea-ice already covers twice the area it did in summer.
  Those animals that a few weeks ago came down here feed in the sea  are now locked out.
  But there are windows in this white desert,  gateways to the rich ocean below.
  Most birds have migrated south, but in the frozen Bering Sea,  ducks of one particular species  are gathering together in a single, immense flock.
  Spectacled eiders, hundreds of thousands of them.
  With the seas that fed them throughout the summer all but frozen,  this is the eider's last refuge.
  Such patches of open water, kept free of ice by strong currents,  are given a Russian name, polynyas.
  If this polynya stays open all winter,  the ducks will have avoided an exhausting migration.
  It's a gamble and a tremendous risk, especially for the spectacled eider,  for this polynya holds the world's entire population.
  Surrounded by ice,  these spectacled eiders' survival depends on this single, vulnerable oasis  and conditions here can change very fast.
  A smaller pool.
  Here, common eider ducks are learning a bitter lesson.
  An early winter storm has caught them out and the ice is closing in.
  The pool is shrinking and the ducks are freezing to death.
  These gamblers have lost.
  As the sun's influence continues to dwindle here in the north,  the cold pushes south into Arctic lands.
  Winter brings a devastatingly destructive force,  frost.
  Ice crystals form as moisture in the air freezes.
  Inside plants, the same thing is happening to the water in their cells  and their sap.
  With these first frosts, most plants die,  their insides ripped apart by ice crystals.
  Coniferous trees, however, like fir and pine,  can withstand very low temperatures.
  It's these trees that create the greatest forest on our planet.
  This is the Taiga.
  It encircles the globe and contains one third of all the trees on Earth.
  As winter deepens,  frigid air from the Arctic meets warm, moist air from the south,  producing particularly heavy snows.
  For the big animals of the forest,  there's no way of hiding from the winter.
  But size, for the bison of Northern Canada, is in fact their salvation.
  Big bodies lose less heat and can carry more insulation.
  That may be why these bison are the largest land animals in North America.
  And only a large predator can tackle them.
  Wolves hunt better in packs,  but there are only two of them here and the prey they pursue are giants.
  A vast Arctic wilderness stretches all around.
  In it, somewhere, there are bison.
  These deep tracks in the snow are easy to follow  but which way were the bison going?  They have detected a scent, the hunt is on.
  Running in the bison's tracks is easy.
  The snow here is compressed and firm.
  At this rate, the wolves will soon catch up.
  They attempt a shortcut.
  The giant bison can plough on through virgin snow,  but for the wolves, deep snow is a hindrance  and now they're losing ground.
  The hunters rejoin the bison's tracks and the contest is on again.
  The bison are the only prey here in winter,  the wolves have no option, they must tackle them.
  But bison are 10 times their size!  In winter, the line between life and death is so narrow  that for a wolf, even a small injury could be fatal.
  It's crucial they select the right target.
  This one is very big.
  Good decision!  This is smaller, a yearling.
  Even though it's young, it's nonetheless heavier than both wolves combined  and it is extremely powerful.
  The male wolf backs off, perhaps he's frightened of injury.
  But the female is the more determined, or more desperate.
  Having given so much already, she must make the kill.
  This a battle of life and death for them both.
  The bison has no strength left,  the battle is over.
  Winter deepens,  the snow continues to accumulate, smothering the forest.
  Some trees are loaded with three tons of snow.
  It shuts out what little light there is at these latitudes,  and that shortens the growing season still further  and limits how far north trees are able to grow.
  So snow influences both the shapes of the trees  and the extent of this forest.
  And it affects the animals, too.
  It helps to have friends if you want to find food at this time of the year.
  Wolverines and ravens, a match made in the Taiga.
  It's the hardest time of the year to find food.
  But the wolverine knows that a raven's call is as good as a dinner bell.
  And the raven has just recruited the best can-opener in the forest.
  The moose carcass is frozen solid,  but the wolverine has immensely powerful jaws,  well able to deal with "frozen food".
  The raven's bill is more suited to leftovers.
  The raven has to be patient.
  A wolverine's appetite is legendary.
  According to folklore, it can eat more at one sitting  than any other creature in the forest, hence its other name, the glutton.
  What the wolverine can't eat now, it stores in the deep freeze.
  It will bury these food parcels across the forest,  planning ahead for leaner times.
  For a few, the snow is an ally.
  Voles stay active throughout the winter beneath the snow,  despite the freezing temperatures above.
  Travelling along tiny corridors,  they move from pocket to pocket of perfectly refrigerated food.
  Snow is a great insulator,  so down here the temperature never falls more than a degree or so below zero  and that's warm enough for a vole to thrive,  even if it lacks the stature of a bison.
  In some years vole numbers boom,  and then they are forced break cover to search for more food.
  The great grey owl is silent and very skillful hunter,  but deep snow can be beyond its reach.
  But such snow is no barrier to one predator.
  The least weasel.
  A tiny hunter and the vole's nemesis.
  Its body is exactly the same width as a vole's,  so there's nowhere a vole can go that the weasel can't follow.
  The weasel's long, slender shape is perfect for hunting in tunnels,  but the worst possible shape for staying warm.
  So they need a special way of doing that.
  She plucks the fur from its body, tuft by tuft.
  And now she puts it all together to make a cozy blanket,  under which to sleep in her den below the snow.
  Midwinter in the northern forests.
  The sun is so low that it's twilight at midday.
  Further north in the high Arctic,  the sun has been below the horizon for months  and it'll be several more before it appears again.
  The male polar bear spends winter out on the frozen ocean.
  Few creatures can endure these conditions.
  If he's lucky, he will find a carcass that could provide a little food,  possibly that of a fox or another polar bear.
  But otherwise, he must live on his reserves.
  This is the time to scrape by, to wait.
  But on lee-side slopes, beneath the snow, new lives are beginning.
  The cubs are born blind and tiny,  an early birth is easier on the mother, who is barely awake.
  Despite her sleepiness, her instinct to nurse is overwhelming.
  The cubs' clucking calls stimulate her to produce milk.
  And what milk!  It's nine times richer than our own  and enables her to double their weight every few weeks.
  It's over two months since the autumn snows first arrived.
  In two more months, polar bear families will emerge onto the snowy slopes  all around the Arctic.
  But for now, they lie protected within their icy cocoons.
  A hundred miles above the earth, the Aurora lights up the sky.
  After travelling millions of miles across space,  solar winds, attracted by the magnetic pull of the poles,  collide with the Earth's atmosphere.
  Trillions of charged particles dance across the sky.
  Above the Arctic, the Aurora Borealis, the Northern Lights.
  In the south, it's the Aurora Australis, the Southern Lights,  that bring light to Antarctica's long winter.
  These spectacular light shows are only a tease.
  Solar energy maybe, but no warmth that will help the emperor penguins.
  The Arctic winter is brutally cold,  but in Antarctica, the darkest months are even more savage.
  The male penguins have not eaten for months  and have only each other for protection from the gales.
  Each has been entrusted with a single precious egg,  balanced on top of its feet.
  If the egg were to drop onto the ice,  even for a moment, the chick inside would die  and all this would count for nothing.
  The emperors are not entirely alone.
  The Weddell seal,  the only mammal to remain here throughout the winter.
  They must have breathing holes,  and so have to constantly scrape away the ice that threatens to close them,  rasping away fresh build-ups with special, wide-gaped jaws.
  Beneath the ice, they are beyond the reach of the bitter winter winds.
  The sea is -2 degrees centigrade,  a warm bath compared to the conditions overhead.
  The roof of ice insulates this world from the wild fluctuations above.
  The temperature down here has barely changed for 25 million years.
  Of course, animals must still be hardy.
  These Borchgrevinki fish have anti-freeze in their blood,  so they are untroubled swimming among the ice crystals.
  Many animals here are remarkably long-lived,  perhaps because the conditions are so stable.
  Some sponges could be a thousand years old  and large enough for a human to hide in.
  There could hardly be a greater contrast  to the bleak, windswept world just above.
  But there is a constant danger here.
  Swirling patterns in the water reveal its presence.
  They are made by brine, super-concentrated salt water.
  It's a warning.
  New sea-ice forming above  leaves behind brine that is so extremely salty it sinks rapidly.
  As it descends, the sea water around it freezes instantly  and forms a sheath of ice,  a brinicle that grows downwards towards the sea floor.
  Winter is reaching down from the cold world above.
  As it touches the sea floor, it kills whatever living thing it contacts  by encasing it in a tomb of ice.
  Even in the relative warmth of the water,  the lethal cold of winter threatens life on the sea floor.
  Another more constant attack rises from below.
  Pressure in the depths keeps water liquid  even though its temperature is far from freezing.
  Currents bring up this colder water and it turns to ice,  covering everything that can't move away from it.
  And then the ice, being lighter than water, begins to float,  lifting away anything attached.
  Even some of the faster-moving animals are caught.
  So the ice cleanses the sea floor  and strews the ceiling above with remnants of life from below.
  A sign that winter is nearly over.
  The songs of male Weddell seals, challenging their rivals to battle.
  The male seal's calls can heard over 15 miles away.
  He aims to control the best breathing holes,  for they will determine his mating rights in spring.
  His calls create powerful shockwaves in the water.
  They are threats.
  This hole has already been claimed  and the owner will not surrender it willingly.
  No change this time.
  The challenger will need to find a hole with a weaker owner.
  The battles continue until the females arrive,  and that time is now close.
  The sun returns to Antarctica.
  The longest night on earth has ended and winter begins to give way to spring.
  Female emperor penguins.
  After four months feeding at sea, they are returning sleek and fat.
  Penguins, it seems, can fly after all.
  But a winter at sea has left them a little out of practice.
  There is no time to waste.
 Far away, the males are waiting.
  While the females were gone, the sea-ice grew  and it's now twice the distance from its edge back to their colony.
  Seventy miles away, the males are in desperate need of help.
  Despite doing all they can to conserve their energy,  many are close to dying from starvation.
  Reunited after three months apart.
  The reward for her return, a first glimpse of her chick.
  The reunion made, it's time for the hand-over.
  The father finds it hard to let go.
  Some gentle persuasion is needed.
  He has endured the most appalling conditions on Earth  to ensure the survival of his chick and the bond is strong.
  The exchange must be quick,  as the tiny chick, unprotected, could freeze to death in seconds.
  A task that began in autumn has been completed.
  Despite the huge odds against it,  the precious chick has survived the winter  and is now with its mother, and she has food.
  The chick's first fresh meal.
  Her mission is complete.
  But for other mothers, the journey ends in disappointment.
  Their chicks have not survived.
  The female's need to nurture remains strong.
  Any chick that strays from its parent is at grave risk of being kidnapped.
  The chaos may be a consequence of frustrated parental urge,  but the outcome can be tragic.
  For those emperor penguins that survive, the worst is over for this year.
  There will soon be abundant food for everyone.
  The emperors have taken on the polar winter and won.
  The gamble has paid off.
  All other animals escaped,  only they remained to raise their young,  and now it is they who will benefit most from the rich southern spring.
  Another arrival is the certain confirmation that spring is here.
  The AdÃ©lies,  having spent winter at sea, have come back,  but they have not even mated yet, let alone laid their eggs.
  Now at last, the male emperors  can return to where they are most at home.
  One season ends and another begins.
  The penguins will soon be joined by migrants  and the far south will bustle with life for a few frantic months.
  But there are only a special few, north and south,  who can survive winter at the farthest ends of our planet.
  More than any other season in the poles,  winter was to pose the greatest challenge to the Frozen Planet crew.
  The team endured winds of over 100 miles an hour  and temperatures as low as -50 degrees centigrade.
  Their boats were trapped in sea-ice for days,  while bears trapped others indoors.
  Some of the coldest conditions experienced  were near the Arctic circle in Northern Canada.
  In winter, temperatures dropped to -40 degrees and stayed there.
  On the edge of the vast Taiga forest,  the team hoped to film one the most remarkable  predator-prey relationships on the planet.
  What they experienced was the struggle against the elements,  what they witnessed was a more profound struggle for life and death.
  Wood Buffalo National Park covers 28,000 square miles,  the size of Denmark.
  One of the few cameramen to have filmed wolves and bison here is Jeff Turner.
  I first tried to film bison and wolves  in this national park 15 years ago and getting around on the ground  is incredibly difficult at any time of the year, but in the winter it's tough.
  We quickly realized that the only way we were going to get anything here  was we had to get up in the air.
  The Frozen Planet team  had never attempted aerial filming in such low temperatures.
  The first challenge for director Chadden Hunter  was protecting the sensitive aerial camera,  at -40, electrical cables short-circuit like fireworks.
  - Oh! - Ooh.
  - How cold can you fly this chopper? - Minus-40.
  Aerial cameraman Michael Kelem comes from sunny California  and has never experienced temperatures so low.
  What kind of temperatures can you operate down to?  Me, usually about 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
 LA kind of weather,  - Yeah.
 - I'm only rated for Santa Monica.
  Operating delicate controls while wearing gloves  is not easy.
 A computer and joystick are needed  to control the aerial camera attached to the outside of the helicopter.
  It's actually warmed up to -30.
  Michael would have to choose between dexterity or warmth.
  With their camera mounted on the nose,  the aerial team could now fly hundreds of miles in search of the animals.
  Jeff, meanwhile, is still on foot,  scouting the other side of the national park.
  I wonder what Jeffâs getting on the ground?  Oh, man, it's cold.
  With the wind today it's about -37  so you got to keep these heaters in here,  to keep the camera running at these temperatures.
  From 3,000 feet up,  Chadden catches a glimpse of the elusive wolf pack.
  I can see wolves, I can see wolves near buffalo.
  - 10, 15, there's a big pack.
 - Wow.
  We've got a big pack of wolves here.
  The wolf pack turns out to number an extraordinary 25 individuals,  one of the largest ever filmed.
  There's two more walking in from the left.
  And it looks like they're already on the hunt.
  The helicopter allows the team to shadow the wolf pack without disturbing them.
  So, let's go back into nice, slow circle around them.
  They look pretty determined.
  The pack are moving in on their prey  and the aerial team are perfectly placed.
  They're making their definitely making their move.
  Wow, there's buffalo on the move.
  - The chase is on.
 - Extreme concentration is now needed  both from pilot and the cameraman to keep the shots smooth.
  Yeah, there's more coming in now.
  There's a nice, tight little pack challenging them.
  We've got a nice shot of the pack,  the wolves coming up at the back.
 You got them still?  Yeah, I got them here, I'm just going to pick it up a little bit.
  Okay, okay, tighten up, just a hair.
  Just want to get a shot of the wolves at the back of the pack.
  The wolf pack have picked out a young bison.
  Holy.
  As Michael struggles to hold the shot steady,  no one is prepared for what came next.
  Oh, hey, look, they just knocked him down, pretty much.
  A one-ton bull charges through,  taking out both the wolves and the young bison.
  I've never seen anything like that in the wild, that is unbelievable.
  The team have filmed extraordinary new behavior from the air  but Jeff was nowhere nearby.
  To complete the sequence, they will need to work together,  only by using the helicopter to position Jeff  will they able to get both air and ground coverage.
  This pack will now feast for days, so the crew must move on.
  Jeff takes the team deeper into the wilderness  in search of a new wolf pack.
  With everyone on board, there are more eyes for spotting.
  Bison on the run can only mean one thing, wolves.
  But this time, only a pair.
  Jeff must anticipate the animals' every move  and direct the helicopter to where he needs to be dropped off.
  They're going this way.
  I had to figure out exactly  where the buffalo were going to run, try to get there ahead of them.
  If I got dropped off in the wrong position, we would blow it.
  There wasn't going to be a second chance.
  That moment when you get out of the helicopter  and it leaves you behind, you feel an incredible sense of isolation.
  On the lake, I'll guide you in,  down to the right, down, zoom in.
  - Are you on the back guy? - We're on the back guy.
 On the back.
  - Which one is he going for? - I don't know.
  - But there's one broken off.
 - Oh!  - Oh, my God.
 - They're coming in now.
  When I saw the herd coming around the corner,  I knew we'd picked the right spot, I was right in front of them.
  And the buffalo running right towards you,  it definitely does get your heart pounding.
  The bison have poor eyesight  and can't see Jeff.
 It's now test of nerves.
  Weighing one ton and running at 40 miles an hour,  one wrong step and the bison could kill Jeff.
  At the last second,  they spot him and three peel away to the other side.
  At the back of the herd, the wolves have closed in.
  They're still at him.
 They're trying to separate that little one.
  - Oh, they got him! - Both wolves are on him.
  - Both clamping down on him.
 - Yeah, he got stomped.
  He got stomped on there.
  What followed was one of the most emotional and powerful scenes  the Frozen Planet team were ever to film.
  Jeff has picked his position perfectly,  he is now only 50 meters from the animals  and able film a truly epic battle.
  I had never been so close to a wolf and bison battle,  I could hear them breathing.
  And the power of the buffalo,  the way he just threw this wolf around like it was a rag doll.
  I couldn't believe the beating this wolf was taking.
  The struggles that we'd had with the winter and the cold and the snow  just felt so insignificant compared to these two animals  that were struggling for their very lives.
  For over an hour, I watched this wolf and bison  battle each other to a standstill.
  They were both unbelievably exhausted.
  Watching these two animals engaged in this massive life and death struggle  was one of the most powerful things I'd ever witnessed in the wild.
  As a filmmaker, you're definitely torn watching something like this.
  You know you need to keep filming and you know this a natural event,  but it's also incredibly sad to know that  one of these two magnificent animals isn't going to make it.
  The bison is fatally wounded, the battle is over.
  The team have managed to capture a remarkable hunt  from both ground and air.
  All of them have been humbled  by witnessing an extraordinary winter struggle for survival.
 
                    The polar regions are more hostile to life than any other part of the Earth.
  Human beings have little natural protection against the cold,  so why, for thousands of years,  have we endured the hardships that come from living here?  And what keeps us coming back today,  to the farthest extremes of our planet?  Winter in the most northerly town on Earth, Longyearbyen.
  Here, for three months of the year, the sun never rises.
  Only the full moon, which never sets as far north as this,  sheds any light into the darkness.
  This town was built here in Svalbard,  only 700 miles from the North Pole, to support a mine.
  The Arctic is rich in coal, oil and minerals.
  In Siberia, the Russian Arctic, the mineral  wealth has given rise to large cities.
  This is Norilsk, the coldest city on Earth.
  Temperatures regularly drop to below minus 50 degrees Centigrade.
  Fuel freezes in the tanks of the trucks, and  has to be melted in a rather alarming way.
  Ships are frozen into the rivers for nine months of the year.
  The ice must be cut away from their hulls  because steel becomes brittle and vulnerable to the thickening ice.
  Like all Arctic cities, Norilsk depends on a  power plant which heats everybody's home.
  Waste heat from the plant even keeps a lake ice-free all winter.
  Even at air temperatures of minus 50, the  Norilsk Walrus Club come here every day.
  There is evidence that a dip in cold water is good for the immune system,  but when the water is a degree above freezing,  it's hard to imagine that the benefits could outweigh the pain.
  Today's Arctic city dwellers can lead an  almost normal existence thanks to technology.
  But towns and cities are very recent arrivals in the polar landscape.
  The polar regions are the least populated part of our planet.
  Most of the Arctic remains empty of human beings.
  In the north, the Pole itself is covered by a freezing ocean.
  Around it lie vast lands, of which Siberia is the largest and coldest.
  Human beings first ventured onto the great plains of Siberia,  the tundra, thousands of years ago, and some live here still.
  The Dolgan are one of the few tribes who still live in much the same way  as those first Arctic pioneers.
  scraping a living by nibbling tiny plants that survive beneath the snow.
  Nobody has ever totally tamed reindeer,  but today's animals are docile enough to allow the Dolgan  to drive them across the tundra in an everlasting search for their food.
  This is a typical Dolgan village, home to just two extended families.
  Here, in the coldest part of Arctic, the only way to get water  for nine months of the year is to melt ice from the frozen rivers.
  At least there's no problem preventing food from decay.
  Outside is one big deep-freeze.
  Survival is only possible because of reindeer fur.
  It makes wonderfully warm clothing,  though small children still have to be sewn into  their clothes to prevent instant frostbite.
  The Dolgan even use reindeer fur to insulate their huts.
  This is living at its most communal.
  Good relations with the in-laws are essential.
  Reindeer are so valuable that the people  only eat them if they have no other choice.
  Their favourite food is raw fish from the frozen rivers.
  Every week or so, these families have to travel  to find new feeding grounds for their herds.
  First, they round up their strongest animals with lassoes,  a skill that their ancestors brought with  them when they came north from Central Asia.
  And then, literally, they move house.
  A whole Dolgan village can move on in just a few hours.
  Over the year, they travel hundreds of miles like this across the vast tundra.
  It was the herds of reindeer, wandering over the lands of the Arctic,  that brought the first Dolgan here.
  Other people, however, took on an even greater challenge.
  They left the land and looked for their food out on the frozen sea.
  Here in the shifting world of the sea ice, they found sea mammals.
  Pasha leads a group of Inuit men in Chukotka,  the North Eastern corner of Russia.
  The men have travelled many hours from home in the bitter cold,  fighting their way through a dangerous maze.
  These hundred tonne ice floes could crush their small boats like eggshells.
  The men have big families, and this is the only way they have of feeding them.
  Pasha is looking for the puffs of steamy air produced by their quarry.
  An animal that is bigger than many Arctic whales.
  A two tonne seal with formidable tusks.
  A walrus.
  It's heading for open water.
 They must reach it before it dives.
  An angry walrus could easily overturn the boats.
  The harpoon sticks firmly in the walrus's thick layer of blubber,  and floats attached to it prevent the animal from diving.
  Pasha wants to kill quickly with a single clean shot.
  The hunters are exhausted after a long day,  but they still have a lot more work to do.
  This enormous prize will feed everyone's family for weeks.
  It will take many hours to butcher.
 Nothing will go to waste.
  The meat is parcelled up in bags made of the animal's skin.
  Summer is almost here.
  This far north, the seasons change fast,  the sun is rising higher and growing warmer with each passing day.
  The transformation from winter to summer is so dramatic  that it dominates the lives of all who live here.
  The ice around the coast has almost disappeared,  and gone are the seals and walrus that Pasha and his men relied on.
  They set off on another search for food.
  Their destination is an island in the bay.
  Their walrus skin boat is an ancient design,  light enough to carry high up the beach so it doesn't drift away.
  THEY SPEAK RUSSIAN  Once again, the men will have to work as a team,  but one of them will be taking very serious risks.
  The lightest man in the group, Kolya, is also the oldest.
  He will trust his life to a length of old  nylon rope and the strength of his friends.
  These 100 metre high cliffs are home to thousands of guillemots,  and Kolya is after their eggs.
  He relies on the men above to lower him to the right place.
  Kolya is tough but his stress is obvious.
  HE SHOUTS IN RUSSIAN  The men lower Kolya down to the bottom of the cliff,  and from there, he works his way back up the crumbling rock face.
  Stop!  This mission will produce no more than about 50 eggs,  but at least there's no need to carry a packed lunch.
  Over the years, many men have fallen to their deaths collecting seabird eggs.
  This is truly dangerous work.
  These Arctic peoples can't grow crops.
  The frozen ground never thaws to allow them to do so.
  They rely on animals for their food so the chance to collect a few  dozen eggs has to be taken, even if it means risking your life.
  The change of season has transformed the Arctic's coastline  and inland, the difference is just as extreme.
  July temperatures on the tundra can be  surprisingly high, over 30 degrees centigrade.
  Reindeer now move not just to find fresh pasture,  but also to avoid the summer swarms of blood sucking flies.
  To keep their animals healthy, the local herders are driving them to the sea.
  The cooler conditions on the coast bring relief to the herds  and the chance, every year, for different tribes to meet.
  Pasha and his hunters live close by.
  They've had word of the herders' arrival.
  The hunters' cargo is highly prized for the winter ahead,  fat-rich walrus meat that's been fermenting  in the skin bags for two months.
  Today will see an exchange that has taken place every summer for centuries.
  The herders barter reindeer skins for walrus meat.
  Pooling their resources has helped these communities to survive for so long.
  A fry-up of guillemot eggs is all the better when shared with old friends.
  Summer brings a brief chance for isolated peoples to meet.
  This is an opportunity to exchange news, arrange weddings,  and tell the latest jokes.
  HE SPEAKS RUSSIAN  By August, the summer is over.
  Winter arrives only too swiftly, but the peoples of the Arctic,  who came here originally to hunt, have devised ways to deal with  the hostile and changing conditions that have stood the test of time.
  Today, there's a new draw to the Arctic.
  This is Greenland, a territory of Denmark now  known to be rich in oil and precious metals.
  This sled team is part of the Danish Special Forces.
  They're on one of the world's toughest journeys, a 2,000 mile patrol  to maintain Denmark's claim to this valuable wilderness.
  But the patrol's mission is only possible with  the help of man's oldest Arctic companion.
  Rasmus and Roland have spent the summer months training  and getting to know their team of Greenland huskies.
  They need to have a very close bond with every single dog.
  This is Roger and Armstrong,  actually the oldest dog in the whole patrol, but he's still going strong.
  The men are totally dependent on the stamina of their dogs,  which will keep on running all through the bitter cold of the winter.
  This is the last time the team will see the sun for two months.
  The most intelligent dogs always lead,  choosing the safest route, feeling for hidden crevasses and thin ice.
  This is one of six teams that patrol the whole of northeast Greenland,  the only people in an empty wilderness that is  larger than France and Great Britain combined.
  Conditions here are too extreme for current mining technology,  but some day, ways will be found of digging out the huge mineral treasures  that lie hidden within these mountains.
  The patrol secures Denmark's claim to do so simply by being here.
  But it's not the prospect of getting rich  that makes men sign up for this patrol,  it's the chance for the journey of a lifetime.
  The team travel over the ice for six  months, covering up to 40 miles in a day.
  Friendship and teamwork are essential if they're to succeed.
  Their dogs can sleep outside no matter how cold it gets.
  Rasmus and Roland have a nice cosy tent.
  They have a few modern conveniences, including a radio,  with which they report their position back to headquarters in Denmark  and catch up on the latest news.
  Right now it's the section of money,  what's new in the economy in Denmark, the financial crisis  and all the other things that we actually don't care about out here.
  If you can cope with the conditions, then  winter in the Arctic can be magical,  especially when the greatest light show on Earth is overhead.
  The first humans in the Arctic believed the Northern Lights,  or aurora borealis, were dancing spirits.
  Now we know the lights are caused by electrically  charged particles streaming from the sun,  attracted by the magnetic pull of the earth's poles.
  A big aurora storm contains enough energy to knock out satellite  communications and power supplies across the northern hemisphere,  so understanding the aurora is vital.
  In Alaska, rockets are used to study the Lights.
  A hundred miles up, at the edge of outer space, the rockets  release a cloud of glowing smoke that's visible from earth.
  The smoke is blown by fierce winds which are generated by the aurora.
  Mapping the movement of the smoke helps scientists to understand  how this unearthly spectacle affects our atmosphere.
  They constantly monitor the aurora to help protect us  from its effects, so the rest of us can simply enjoy the magic,  just as the Arctic's first people must have done, thousands of years ago.
  For all the many peoples of the Arctic,  the aurora is a reminder of the sun's  presence throughout the dark days of winter.
  But when the sun is below the horizon in the north,  it's above it at the southern end of our planet.
  Here, humanity's history has been very different.
  Antarctica is far colder than the Arctic,  and 99% of its land is permanently blanketed by ice.
  Antarctica is so utterly remote  and inhospitable that no people ever settled here.
  It was only 200 years ago that the first human beings  even glimpsed the vast continent.
  The first people who crossed the Southern Ocean did  so for the same reason that the first people went to the Arctic Ocean,  to hunt sea mammals.
  The populations of whales and seals are only now beginning to  recover from 150 years of intensive hunting.
  But none of those hunters ever tried to venture into  the frigid interior of the Antarctic continent.
  The first successful attempt to do that was made only a hundred years ago.
  This hut was the base for one of the most  famous expeditions in polar history.
  It was from here in 1911 that Captain Scott and his team  launched their attempt to be the first people to reach the South Pole.
  The cold, dry conditions have preserved the interior  of the hut almost exactly as the expedition members left it.
  Expedition photographer Herbert Ponting  captured the spirit of the age of exploration.
  These first explorers borrowed the techniques of the Arctic peoples.
  They wore fur gloves and boots and burned seal blubber to keep warm.
  They built sleds based on a traditional Inuit design.
  They even made their sleeping bags from reindeer hide.
  Scott and his men sought the glory of discovery in an untouched wilderness,  and died in the attempt.
  But he, and those who followed him, were the first to reveal  the splendour of Antarctica to the rest of the world.
  The lure of adventure still draws intrepid travellers today.
  Like the first explorers,  most modern visitors come during the brief summer when the cold relents  enough for the toughest icebreakers to reach the edge of the continent,  but most still need a helicopter to go further.
  The scenery in Antarctica is magnificent and dramatic,  but what really attracts people here is the wildlife.
  An emperor penguin colony is a particular highlight.
  Because human beings didn't arrive in the  Antarctic until the past few centuries,  the animals have never developed a fear of man.
  But very strict regulations govern how close people can approach any wildlife.
  And when visitors leave, they must take  every trace of their visit away with them.
  Since 1959, the whole of Antarctica has been protected by international treaty.
  The nations of the world have agreed that no country can claim Antarctica,  or prospect for its oil or minerals.
  The only significant human activities allowed here are those that  extend our scientific knowledge.
  But unlocking Antarctica's secrets requires some unusual tools.
  This brand new robot submarine has been designed to go  far beyond the limits of any human.
  Today, this diver is putting the sub through  its paces on one of its very first dives.
  It's designed to be small and nimble enough  to explore the Antarctic seabed without damaging it.
  The submarine's mission, as it journeys into the unknown,  is to map the seafloor and look for species new to science.
  The seawater here is a degree below zero, so even  the toughest human diver can't stay down for long.
  The submarine will explore deeper under the ice than anyone has gone before.
  From the depths of the ocean to the highest peaks of the land,  new discoveries are being made even in places  which were first visited over a century ago.
  Mount Erebus was an irresistible draw to  the legendary explorer Ernest Shackleton.
  In 1908, his men became the first to climb this active volcano.
  They soon discovered that this is the coldest place on the Antarctic coast.
  Today's explorers still have to guard  against frostbite in the height of summer  when temperatures rarely creep above minus 30 degrees centigrade.
  Shackleton's men had no idea of the extraordinary spectacle  that lay beneath their feet.
  Yep, OK, up on the wall there somewhere now.
 Yeah.
  Under the ice and snow is a network of caves,  which only a handful of expert cavers have ever dared to enter.
  This is the first scientific expedition to explore them in detail.
  Here, there are ice formations that occur nowhere else on Earth.
  Each cave contains its own unique collection of structures.
  The team is mapping the caves to see how their shape changes over the years.
  OK, flat side to here.
  That's 126.
8 degrees for the angle.
  126.
8.
 Correct.
  The steam leaking from vents in the side of the volcano  is constantly sculpting this labyrinth that extends deep under the ice.
  When the hot breath of the volcano hits the icy walls,  the moisture in the air freezes into beautiful shapes.
  Some of the crystals are so unusual that the cavers are investigating  a remote but tantalising possibility about their formation.
  Could it be that some of these extraordinary crystal shapes  are formed by highly specialised bacteria, living in the ice?  Nobody yet knows the answer.
  This is just one of the many strange mysteries that draw people to  work in a place that is so hostile to human life.
  While some scientists come to Erebus to explore its bizarre ice caves,  others visit the volcano to study the innermost workings of our planet.
  Erebus is one of the most active volcanoes on Earth,  but even so, volcanologists work on the very rim of its crater.
  They stand in the bitter cold, while 100 metres below them  is a lava lake where temperatures are over a thousand degrees centigrade.
  This is a rare glimpse of the molten rock  that lies beneath the earth's crust.
  But research here is looking up as well as down,  measuring how the gases that bubble out of the volcano  influence the make-up of the air we breathe.
  Antarctica is the best place to measure any changes in our atmosphere  because it has the least polluted air on Earth.
  It's also the perfect place to launch more outward-looking missions.
  This balloon, made of material no thicker than Clingfilm,  will eventually grow to be 300 metres tall.
  It will carry a device for detecting cosmic rays,  tiny particles from the beginning of time that are only now reaching earth.
  The balloon will travel to the very edge of outer space  to gather clues about the formation of the universe.
  Even today, very few ever make the journey inland from the coast.
  We still know remarkably little about the interior of the continent.
  The people on this plane are trying to answer one of the fundamental questions.
  How much ice is there in Antarctica?  They measure the depth of the ice sheet,  which is over 4,000 metres in places, using radar.
  Their work will enable us to see  how the volume of Antarctica's ice changes in the future.
  It also makes it possible to map a hidden landscape.
  This plane is following the same route through the Trans-Antarctic Mountains  that Captain Scott took a hundred years ago.
  His team hauled their sleds over a hundred  miles up this glacier, the Beardmore.
  Skirting seemingly endless crevasses, with no map to guide them  and no idea of what lay ahead, it was a journey of extraordinary suffering.
  Their target lay beyond the mountains,  over 3,000 metres above sea level, on the Antarctic Plateau.
  An unbroken sheet of ice, larger than Western Europe,  this is the coldest, the windiest, the most lifeless place on Earth.
  Roald Amundsen's team narrowly defeated Scott's to become  the first people to reach the South Pole on the 14th of December 1911.
  Nobody else successfully completed the journey for nearly 50 years after that.
  But, since 1957, there has been a permanent base at the South Pole.
  You can even land a plane on the ice runway.
  The early explorers would be astounded by  the facilities at the South Pole today.
  Construction work isn't easy when the average  summer temperature is minus 25 degrees Centigrade.
  But, despite the difficulties, the most high-tech scientific research  station ever built was unveiled here in 2006.
  The brand new Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station is designed to  cope with the World's most extreme conditions.
  The building's sloping edge deflects the prevailing wind.
  Beneath, there are stilts that can raise the whole building  a further eight metres to keep it above the accumulating snow.
  Living inside is as close to being on a space-station as you can find on Earth.
  This base is totally self-sufficient, the people are completely  cut off from the outside world for more than half the year over winter.
  The total darkness makes this the perfect place to study the night sky.
  The group of star gazers will be the most isolated community on our  planet, but they will have all their needs catered for.
  There is even a greenhouse where fresh vegetables grow under  artificial light all through the darkest, coldest winter anywhere.
  The sun sets in March at the South Pole, and won't rise again for six months.
  For a few days at this time of year, high altitude clouds of ice crystals  continue to catch the sunlight, even when  the sun itself is far below the horizon.
  But soon all trace of the sun disappears,  and today's over-wintering scientists remember the first explorers.
  These men, who endured the winter in flimsy wooden huts,  borrowed knowledge from the Arctic pioneers before them,  but they came here to study and explore, rather than to hunt or exploit.
  They embodied the human spirit that has enabled us to survive at the poles.
  Here, we are pushed to our limits, but in being pushed, humanity has  achieved the extraordinary and opened up the last frontier.
 
                    1 This white wilderness,  this emptiness, is the North Pole.
  I'm standing in the middle of a frozen ocean.
  Beneath my feet, and for over 500 miles in every direction,  there are several meters of ice.
  But something significant is likely to happen here  at the North Pole soon.
  Chances are that sometime within the next few decades,  perhaps even as soon as 2020,  there will be open water here  for the first time in human recorded history.
  The Arctic and Antarctic are changing.
  Enormous masses of ice  that have been frozen for thousands of years  are breaking apart and melting away.
  Ice scientists are going to extremes to find out exactly what's going on.
  For them, these are exciting times,  but the transformation that's being seen here  will be felt far beyond the polar wilderness.
  In this program, I'll be trying to understand  what these changes mean, not just to the wildlife and people  that live around the Poles, but for the whole planet.
  I'm starting my journey in the Arctic, the far north of our planet.
  It's still very cold outside by most people's standards,  but the Arctic has been warming fast, twice as fast as the rest of our planet.
  My first mission is to find out what effect that's having on the animals.
  Although first, we have to find them.
  It's April in Svalbard.
  We are a thousand miles north of the Arctic Circle  in search of the region's top predator.
  We need to travel away from the land and out over the frozen sea.
  There are some tracks right beneath us.
  Over there!  I'm with a Norwegian team  which is giving the polar bears of Svalbard their yearly health check.
  - She's under us now.
 - I'll come round for a clean shot.
  The team works together to give an anesthetic injection  from a dart gun without hurting the bear.
  It takes tremendous skill.
  Ah, you got it!  Iâll just back off until she's asleep.
  Nobody likes to see a magnificent animal like a polar bear  lolling about unconscious on the ice,  but it's only by darting them in this way  and keeping check on them year after year,  that we can be sure we know what is happening to them  and the population of polar bears as a whole.
  Over the last 30 years, many teams have been seeing  the condition of their local bears deteriorate.
  Although not every bear is suffering.
  - How much? - Ninety-six there,  and 102 here, so that's 197, yeah.
  - Is that good? - It's not too bad.
  It's a bit above average.
  So she's a bear in a good condition for Svalbard today.
  The trouble is  that if this was underweight, she would be in trouble,  not only from her own point of view but from the point of view of her cubs,  because an underweight female gives birth to underweight cubs,  and underweight cubs have a great problem  of surviving their difficult first year in these circumstances.
  It can be -40 degrees centigrade when polar bear cubs emerge  at the start of the Arctic spring from their dens where they were born.
  This mother hasn't eaten for half a year.
  She and her cubs need to fatten up fast over the next few months  and their chances of survival depend on what's happening beneath their feet.
  These polar bears aren't walking on land,  they're roaming across the frozen surface of the sea.
  And the bears' food lives under the ice.
  Ringed seals are hunted by polar bears.
  In fact, in some parts, polar bears eat almost nothing else.
  So it's very understandable that this mother ringed seal,  who's looking at me now,  should be a little apprehensive.
  That pup of hers is only about three or four days old,  and the pup won't be able to swim for another two or three days.
  Seals have good reason to be nervous around their holes.
  They need the holes to breathe when the sea is frozen,  but this makes them easy to find.
  Polar bears can sniff out seal holes even if they're covered in snow.
  Spring is the best hunting season.
  This mother's found a food store under the snow  that was probably made by an Arctic fox.
  It's a time of plenty now,  but the bear family need to make the best of it  because the good times are about to come to an end.
  As the weather warms, the ice beneath the bears' feet  starts to break up and then melt.
  And as the ice dwindles,  so do the bears' chances of a successful hunt.
  Most of the ice is lost over the shallow coastal waters  where most of the seals live.
  It's now summer and these bears have a choice.
  Take their chances on the shrinking ice floes  or make for the safety of the land.
  It's a case of sink or swim.
  Bears have always gone hungry in the summer,  but the length of time when there's enough ice for them to go hunting  is getting shorter and shorter across much of the Arctic.
  This is hitting cubs particularly hard  because they can't survive for as long without feeding as their mother.
  Cubs that were born underweight are at the greatest risk.
  This mother and her cubs may well not get another meal  until the sea freezes again in winter.
  There's not much to eat on land,  and the fact is that the longer the cubs have to wait until the ice returns,  the more likely they are to die.
  Longer summers with no ice are probably the main reason  why many polar bear populations are dropping.
  To help monitor bears into the future,  this female is being fitted with a radio collar  to track her movements.
  It's an extraordinary sensation  to be so close to such a powerful animal.
  With luck, carrying that collar,  she will have more years to go yet,  and be telling us a great deal about herself  and the rest of the race of polar bears as they face this very uncertain future.
  The future of the ice cover on the sea isn't just an issue for the animals.
  It's a big concern for the people who live in the Arctic  and travel across the ice every day.
  David Iqaqrialu is an Inuit from the village of Clyde River  in the Canadian Far North.
  There are very few roads up here,  so David and his community, like most Inuit people,  have always travelled across the frozen sea.
  Dog sleds are the safest way to get around  because the dogs feel thin ice underfoot and won't lead travelers into trouble.
  Old-timers like David know the ice as well as we know the streets  in our local neighborhood.
  Every spring, cracks have always formed in the same places at the same time.
  It's going to be big very soon, after two weeks maybe,  it will be more open.
  But now, cracks are appearing where they never did before,  so David and his friend Laimikie have taken on a new job.
  They are using special GPS units  to record the position of new cracks or weak ice.
  These findings will be used by locals for their own safety  but they're also being studied by ice scientists  who want to predict how the ice will change  in years to come.
  The Inuit are keen to know what the future holds, too,  because they've seen with their own eyes  the changes that the scientists have seen from space.
  This satellite photo from 1980  shows the Arctic Ocean at the end of summer  when ice cover is at its minimum.
  Since then, there's been a 30% drop in the area covered by ice.
  But these images can't tell us about changes to the most important factor,  the thickness of the ice.
  Measuring thickness across the whole ocean  was beyond scientists for many years,  until help came from an unexpected source.
  The Arctic Ocean is of huge military importance,  as it's the shortest route between North America and Russia.
  Since the late 1950s, British, US and Russian submarines  have been patrolling the Arctic Ocean.
  But as well as looking out for enemy activity,  they've also been measuring the thickness of the ice,  critical when looking for a place to surface.
  When scientists got permission to look at the submarine crews' records,  they discovered that the ice has been thinning fast.
  In fact, it's nearly halved in thickness since 1980.
  Across most of the Arctic Ocean,  there are now just a couple of meters of ice.
  It's so thin that it could melt away almost entirely in the summertime  and that includes the ice at the North Pole.
  If current trends continue,  then there will be open ocean here by summer's end  sometime within the next few decades.
  So, the days of the Arctic Ocean  being covered by a continuous sheet of ice seem to be past.
  Whether or not that's a good or bad thing,  of course, depends on your point of view.
  Nobody has had a better view of the changes to the Arctic Ocean  than the people of Barrow, the most northerly town in Alaska.
  The people here have always survived by hunting on the frozen sea  and they celebrate this at a festival every year.
  The blanket toss was once the best way to spot distant animals to hunt,  as lifelong resident Lewis Brewer explains.
  When we throw ourselves up into the blanket, you know,  you get that much more of an "Ah!" of seeing further and further out.
  So, sometimes youâll jump 15, 20 feet in the air  and hopefully you're being caught right back into the blanket.
  I'm okay!  But the old way of life is under threat.
  When Lewis was young, the sea stayed frozen to the horizon until July  and some ice remained off-shore all summer,  but now, it's breaking up in June  and melting away completely for two or three months.
  I used to go out on the ice all the time this time of the year.
  But we can't do that any more because there's no more ice.
  Lewis can also see that the loss of sea-ice  is affecting the animals he hunts for a living.
  Since 2007, something very strange has been happening  on this stretch of coastline close to Barrow.
  Mother walruses, confused by the lack of ice,  are crowding onto the land with their pups.
  This very tight crowding isn't normal  and it's caused many youngsters to be crushed to death.
  Many Arctic animals are threatened by the changing conditions  and that's also bad news for the traditional hunters.
  But the ice loss could be good news for some people.
  There are trillions of dollars' worth of oil and gas under the Arctic Ocean,  but the only way to get to them until now  has been by building expensive artificial islands like this.
  But if the sea ice goes,  it will be much easier to drill for the huge riches below.
  So the countries that surround the Arctic  are scrambling to stake their claims.
  This daring attempt by the Russians  to claim the disputed seabed at the North Pole in 2007  caused fury among the competing countries  and it's unlikely to be the last such dispute.
  The Arctic has never been so important, and not just because of its resources.
  The Northwest Passage,  a legendary sea route around the north of Canada and Alaska,  cleared of ice in the summer of 2007 for the first time since records began.
  This promises a much faster and cheaper shipping route  between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
  And some wildlife could benefit from an ice-free Arctic, too.
  Bowhead whales are one of just a few whales  that can live year-round in the Arctic because they have no dorsal fin.
  This means they can come up for air in small spaces  and travel easily under the ice.
  Their unique body shape used to mean  that the Arctic whales had the seas to themselves for most of the year,  but now, some cousins from down south are moving in.
  Killer whales are now a much more common sight in the Arctic.
  Their tall fins make it difficult for them to travel under ice  but the longer summers mean they can travel much farther north  and make the most of the rich Arctic seas.
  For animals and people,  it will be those who can adapt who will thrive in a changing Arctic.
  But the loss of sea-ice isn't just an issue for the Arctic,  because the state of the ice affects the climate of the whole planet.
  Because it's white, the ice reflects up to 90% of the sun's energy.
  This is called the albedo effect,  and it's why we often see heat haze in the Arctic,  even when the air feels cold.
  The frozen Arctic Ocean acts as a huge reflector,  bouncing back the sun's heat into space.
  Throughout history, that has helped to cool the planet,  but when the ice melts, it's a different story.
  Because sea water is dark, it absorbs most of the sun's heat.
  In the Arctic, this can trigger a chain reaction  as the warming water melts more ice, exposing more water to the sun's heat.
  This cycle of warming,  as huge areas start to absorb rather than reflect heat,  is the main reason why the Arctic, a region the size of North America,  is warming twice as fast as the rest of the Earth.
  So, melting sea-ice is a big issue, but there's another kind of ice  that could have an even more dramatic impact on our world,  the ice that is found on land.
  This is freshwater ice,  formed from thousands of years of accumulated snowfall.
  This is the front of a glacier.
  Quite a small one, believe it or not.
  Glaciers are like rivers of frozen fresh water  flowing across the surface of the land.
  This one, like most polar glaciers,  is flowing down from a vast inland ice sheet,  and it's what happens to those ice sheets  that could radically alter the face of the planet.
  The Greenland ice sheet is by far the largest in the Arctic.
  It's two miles thick in places  and six times the size of the United Kingdom.
  Every summer, some of the surface of the ice sheet melts,  forming sapphire-blue lakes of melt water.
  More and more of these lakes have been forming  as Greenland has warmed over the last 20 years.
  This lake has grown over several weeks, and now it's overflowing,  carving a deep channel through the ice.
  A network of channels criss-crosses the ice sheet,  but many of them come to an abrupt end.
  Huge holes like this can open up quite suddenly,  draining the melt water away.
  Alun Hubbard is a glaciologist  studying the enormous power of these waterfalls,  which are known as moulins.
  We've got this amazing moulin going off here today.
  The water's overflowing from the lake, which is beginning to drain.
  Tons of water cascading down this pipe  that is effectively plummeting to the depths of the ice sheet  through over a kilometer of vertical ice.
  Alun is here to study where the melt water goes  and what affect it has on the remaining ice.
  To do that, he needs to find a moulin that has recently run dry.
  Just a week ago, there was a three-mile long, 10-metre deep lake here.
  The weight of all that water cracked the ice beneath  and the lake drained in just a few hours with incredible force.
  Thousand-ton ice boulders were tossed about like dice.
  Alun's team have found the hole down which the lake disappeared  and they want to have a closer look.
  It's not job for anyone with a fear of heights.
  As you can see, it's dry up here, but if you listen,  you can hear the thunder of  There's a lot of water entering it at some depth.
  Alun wants to place a sensor deep into the moulin  to discover how much water is flowing through the ice.
  As they drop, they travel back in time.
  Thirty meters down and they reach ice formed from snow  that fell 10,000 years ago, in the last ice age.
  When this lake drained and the plug got pulled,  and the whole lot flushed down through here,  this ice sheet, it rose by a meter  as that water accessed the bed and force-jacked up the ice sheet.
  So, we know that the water in this whole plumbing cavity system down here,  we know that shoots straight through the ice  and actually hits the bed of the ice sheet.
  We've hit the water! I can see the water now.
  Great.
 Nice work!  This daring experiment  is measuring how the water flowing under the ice sheet  affects the speed with which the glaciers flow from it down to the sea.
  The theory is that the water is acting as a lubricant,  so the more water there is, the faster the glacier flows.
  To the naked eye, glaciers don't appear to move at all.
  But move they do.
  These unique time-lapse images were captured over the last four years.
  Through long observations, we now know that Greenland's ice  is flowing down to the sea twice as quickly as it was 20 years ago.
  The speed of the glaciers affects our sea levels,  because when they reach the water, they break apart into icebergs.
  Occasionally, a real mega-berg is born.
  This is the Store Glacier in May 2010.
  Seventy-five million tons of ice  that had been sitting on land for thousands of years has broken away.
  Events like this have become increasingly common  as Greenland's glaciers flow faster into the sea.
  Every single one of these icebergs raises the sea level a small amount.
  Scientists monitoring the ice sheet  predict that Greenland might add as much as a half meter  to world sea levels by the end of the century,  enough to swamp many of the world's low-lying islands.
  99% of the Arctic's freshwater ice is in Greenland.
  It's a staggeringly big ice sheet but it's just a drop in the ocean  compared to that at the southern end of our planet.
  In Antarctica, there is 10 times more ice,  by far the largest concentration of ice on Earth.
  Our exploration of the Antarctic only began a little over 100 years ago.
  The study of ice retreat here  was unwittingly begun on an expedition led by the great early explorer,  Ernest Shackleton.
  In 1916, after their expedition boat was crushed and sunk by ice,  Shackleton and two companions set off to summon help in a tiny boat.
  They sailed over 800 miles across the Southern Ocean  to the island of South Georgia, on the edge of the Antarctic.
  Near starving and dressed in rags,  the three men walked across the ice sheet at the center of the island  knowing there was a whaling base on the opposite coast  where they could summon help.
  This team of Royal Marines is re-tracing the steps of that journey  in tribute to Shackleton and his men.
  But for all their efforts, they can't exactly copy the great walk  because the ice is not as it was.
  A number of South Georgia's glaciers  were photographed by Shackleton's cameraman.
  Frozen Planet saw a dramatic change when they returned 94 years later.
  Most of South Georgia's glaciers have shrunk  since Shackleton's time,  and most of that has happened  since I first went to the Antarctic 30 years ago.
  I've been to South Georgia several times  and seen how greatly the glaciers there have changed.
  This photograph of a glacier reaching right down to the sea  was taken just six years before I first visited in 1981.
  Now that glacier has retreated by 400 meters away from the beach.
  Temperatures in South Georgia have risen sharply,  but the Southern Hemisphere's most dramatic warming  has happened a little further south.
  In recent years, stronger winds blowing over the Southern Ocean  have brought warmer air to the 800-mile-long finger of land  that forms the northern extremity of the Antarctic continent.
  Here, on the Antarctic Peninsula,  the changing wind patterns have driven temperatures up  by nearly three degrees centigrade over the last 50 years,  10 times the average rate of the rest of the planet.
  The rapid warming is having a big effect on the birdlife.
  The AdÃ©lie penguin is the most southerly nesting of all penguins.
  And like the polar bear, up in the north,  their lives are dependent on the sea-ice.
  AdÃ©lies spend their whole lives near ice.
  These birds have spent the winter feeding at the ice edge  but now it's spring and they've started a long trek  over the frozen sea towards land.
  They're heading for areas of exposed rock,  where they gather to breed in colonies that can be over 100,000 strong.
  But it seems that AdÃ©lies don't find the conditions on the Peninsula  to their liking any more.
  Seventeen years ago, when I was last in the Antarctic,  there were large colonies of AdÃ©lie penguins  all along the Antarctic Peninsula.
  Now warming temperatures have meant less sea-ice  and AdÃ©lie penguin numbers are in decline.
  Many colonies have been emptying fast.
  It may be that penguins are starving or it may be that they are heading south  to colder climes, where there's still plenty of ice on the sea.
  But as in the Arctic,  while ice-loving animals are feeling the heat,  animals that like it a bit more cozy are moving in.
  The bright orange beaks of gentoo penguins  are a much more common sight on the Peninsula these days.
  I always used to know them as residents of the slightly warmer islands  north of the Antarctic, but they've moved south in numbers.
  There are thought to be 10 times more gentoos on the Peninsula now  than just 30 years ago.
  The Peninsula has warmed a great deal but the same is not true further south.
  The Antarctic continent is smothered by the world's greatest ice sheet,  one and a half times the size of Australia and up to three miles thick.
  A staggering 75% of the Earth's fresh water is locked up in this ice.
  Global sea levels would rise by some 60 meters if all this was to melt.
  But what chance is there of that happening here  in the coldest, most hostile place on Earth?  The ice beneath me up here on top of the icecap  is so thick that I am short of breath, simply because of the altitude.
  This is mid-summer  and the average temperature is some 20 degrees below freezing,  and I can tell you it feels much lower than that.
  And even the worst predictions don't suggest that the air  is going to warm enough to melt the ice.
  But now scientists are asking a different question.
  Could the speed at which the Antarctic ice flows off the land  be increased by a warmer ocean?  Where the ice sheet meets the sea,  scientists are going to extreme lengths to find out.
  Firing!  Andy Smith works for the British Antarctic Survey.
  What we have here is one kilogram of pentolite explosive.
  We're going to use this to generate a shockwave  and record the echoes that come back from underneath the ice.
  Firing.
  Andy is particularly interested  in mapping the underside of the ice around the coast,  because here, it isn't resting on land,  it's floating on seawater.
  So if sea temperatures rise just a little,  it can be melted from below.
  Around the coast of Antarctica,  the glaciers have flowed out across the sea  to form immense masses of floating fresh water ice  called ice shelves.
  These freeze to the land around them, sticking fast and acting like bathplugs,  holding back the flow of the glaciers into the sea.
  On the Antarctic Peninsula, a one-degree sea temperature rise  has helped to break apart seven major ice shelves  in the last 30 years.
  This is the Larsen B Ice Shelf,  three times the size of Greater London, breaking apart in 2002.
  Afterwards, the glaciers it had been holding back  started flowing up to six times faster.
  In 2008, a much larger ice shelf  at the southern end of the Peninsula started to break up.
  It's an enormous event that's never been filmed before.
  Andy Smith is flying down the Peninsula to study this phenomenon first-hand.
  We're flying to a place called Wilkins Ice Shelf.
  It's an ice shelf that over the last couple of years  has shown a very sudden and dramatic break-up.
  The Wilkins Ice Shelf is a two-hour-long flight south  from his research base,  but Andy can start to see the evidence of ice shelf break-up  a long way before he gets there.
  As we are heading further south,  we can see more and more icebergs in the ocean,  and most of the big ones will be ones that have broken off  the ice shelves in this area.
  Once we cross the mountains, we should be able to see  Wilkins Ice Shelf, and then it's not far then  to the ice front here where it's collapsing.
  As Andyâs team reaches their destination,  the scale of what's been happening soon becomes clear.
  Here, for thousands of years, an area the size of Yorkshire  has been covered by a sheet of ice 200 meters thick.
  But now, over half of that has broken apart.
  Andy has been studying Antarctic ice for 25 years,  but even he is blown away by what he's seeing.
  Now, that is pretty awesome! That is remarkable!  The edge of the ice shelf has just kind of disintegrated,  and some of the big pieces look like they could be a mile or more in size.
  It's almost like a sort of slow motion explosion.
  It all pushes outwards very quickly.
  Every one of these huge icebergs  will slowly drift out to sea.
  To study how fast that happens, Andy needs to get closer to the action.
  We're going to look around and see if we can find a place where we can land,  and if we can, we'll be able to put out an instrument  that will help us monitor the big icebergs that are breaking off  as the ice shelf breaks up.
  Landing on an iceberg is another first for Andy's team.
  This satellite transmitter will help to track the continued breakup  of this colossal ice shelf.
  The remainder of the Wilkins looks set to break apart soon.
  It's the latest ice shelf to disintegrate  in a wave that's been travelling southwards,  playing a major role in the loss of ice from the Peninsula.
  Next in line, and already weakening in places,  are the ice shelves that hold back  Antarctica's gigantic continental ice sheet.
  And it would only take a small corner of this to slide into the sea  to have major global consequences.
  We've only started to see changes in the Arctic and Antarctic recently,  so it's hard to predict exactly what impact these changes will have,  but we can see for ourselves that these places are changing  and on a scale that is hard to ignore.
  The Poles, north and south, may seem very remote,  but what is happening here is likely to have a greater effect upon us  than any other aspect of global warming.
  If the Arctic sea-ice continues to disappear,  it will drive up the planet's temperature more quickly  and the melting ice sheets could contribute to a sea level rise  of a meter, enough to threaten the homes  of millions of people around the world's coasts  by the end of the century.
  We've seen that the animals are already adapting to these changes.
  But can we respond to what is happening now to the frozen planet?  The increasing unpredictability of the ice  was a big issue for the Frozen Planet team,  who spent three years working on top of it.
  Whether on sea, land, lake or river,  the state of the ice was the first concern  for most filming crews.
  Unexpected breakups left many a cameraman in need of a swift rescue.
  Sometimes help came by boat and sometimes by air.
  I had a chance to see the changing ice conditions for myself  when I visited the North Pole.
  I flew with the team to a temporary camp  that is set up every year in the center of the frozen Arctic Ocean  to support expeditions to the Pole.
  I had never visited the North Pole before  so this was a great highlight for me.
  But it was hard going in temperatures of -40,  so as soon as filming finished, we flew south.
  Little did we know that we had made it out just in time.
  We got back from the Pole camp last night  and I've just bumped into the Russian Commander  who's just heard from the camp,  and the news is that a little crack which I'd seen in the ice  between our tent and the airstrip,  which was no more than an inch or so wide,  has, overnight, widened to 20 meters.
  Temporary breakups caused by stormy weather and strong winds  have happened before,  but they've been getting more and more frequent over recent years  as the ice has got weaker.
  It was only swift action by the staff  that prevented a lot of valuable equipment going in the drink.
  The biggest concern was that the ice airstrip might break apart,  but luckily it held and everyone was able to evacuate  when the weather improved.
  The Frozen Planet team's clearest demonstration  of the power and unpredictability of breaking ice  came when they went to film the melting of a frozen Canadian river.
  Producer Mark Linfield and researcher Matt Swarbrick  have travelled to the Far North of Canada.
  Matt, when was the last time we saw a car?  I don't know, about three hours ago?  They've driven through the vast Northwest Territory  on a mission to film the moment when this frozen waterfall breaks apart.
  The breakup when the frozen river above the waterfall thaws  and masses of water start to flow again can be a spectacular event,  but predicting exactly when it's going to break is the big challenge  if Mark and Matt want to get the best shots.
  And they're not the only ones who want to know.
  When the waterfall breaks, it can flood the town of Hay River,  just downstream, with millions of tons of water and ice.
  Mark is taking advice from the scientist Faye Hicks,  who has the job of predicting when the ice will break.
  What happens is is you get ice jams form upstream  and they start to dam up the water and it builds and builds and builds,  and that can let go and that's a much bigger wave of water,  you know, than just the normal flow.
  So, it just depends upon how dramatically it unfolds.
  Faye takes her research helicopter  to monitor the situation upstream of the waterfall.
  Just 10 miles upriver, the ice is starting to break.
  The locals are concerned because huge amounts of water  can build up if these ice chunks dam the river  and that can lead to devastating flooding in the town  when the dams burst.
  Simon, it's moving through there now.
  Yeah, got you.
 I'm on your six.
  Using cameras and sonar to assess the state of the river,  Faye makes her best guess  of when this breakup will hit the waterfall just above the town.
  As of now, guys, I think we have about 48 hours to go.
  Fayeâs prediction of the 24th of April  is exciting news for the team.
  Upstream from here, it's already starting to melt,  and Faye thinks that we may only have another one or two days  before this whole thing goes,  which is almost impossible to imagine looking at it now,  but that's what she says.
  With the breakup seemingly imminent,  the team set up their cameras in anticipation.
  Over the next 48 hours, the weather warms to well above freezing,  but there's no sign of the breakup.
  The team waits and waits and waits.
  Mark is concerned that the crew have to return home soon,  so he heads into town to get the advice of long-term resident Red McBrian.
  We just have to live with it and take whatever evasive action we can.
  Red has had 50 years of witnessing the power of the river.
  Well, we're hoping that she may break up in two or three days, even.
  - Oh, no.
 No, no, no.
 That's too soon.
 - You think it'll be longer?  Oh, no, no.
 Boys, you're looking at  You're looking at seven or eight days before she breaks of any significancy.
  And if she breaks, she can jam and hold up.
  She can be  She'd be down here probably around the 5th or 6th of May.
  Right.
  The townspeople are on tenterhooks waiting for the big day,  but another week goes by before anything starts to happen.
  Finally it seems that things might be happening.
  We've just heard some cracks from upstream,  so if we're lucky, we might get some action.
  It's 7:00, which gives us two hours light.
  Two hours light.
 If it happens at night,  we're going to miss the whole thing.
  Sure enough, the town is put on red alert  that the river is about to break in the middle of the night.
  They've just called a full evacuation of the Eye Inn where we're staying,  and if we don't move now, we're all going to be underwater  and possibly get trapped here for a few days.
  The team have to move out and get up to the waterfall,  hoping that it doesn't break before it's light enough to film.
  Luckily, the sun is up before the main event begins.
  That is a serious amount of ice coming around the corner.
  After weeks of waiting,  the sleeping giant of a river, and we thought nothing was gonna happen,  and suddenly, look at this!  This is what we're here for.
 Unbelievable!  Absolutely unbelievable!  Holy!  The team is used to handling multiple cameras  but they don't usually have to dodge 10-tonne ice floes  at the same time.
  You can see it's racing over at unbelievable speed.
  The power I just  If you were here to feel this, it's a deep rumbling sound of the river,  I can feel it up through my feet.
  The power, I just can't imagine, that could crush a house in no time.
  The team takes to the air  to witness the destruction that's unleashed,  huge ice blocks are pushed downstream on the wave of water  released by the breaking waterfall.
  This could devastate the town.
  But this year, the townspeople's luck is in.
  The town has escaped flooding.
  Crucially, the ice blocks did not dam the river, it's running free,  and the date of the breakup, 6th of May.
  Red's got it right again.
  I don't use any of these here gauges and mechanical assistance.
  I just go by what I see on the river as I walk it down,  and I say I walk it down, I back and forth every day on the river  to see what's happening,  and that from that I gauge when it's going to hit here  and what the situation's going to be like when it does get here.
  You know, when it went this morning,  I said to my students, "Guess what the date is?"  Red told us it's the 6th of May, and we were  You know, I'm not surprised because we've been here a couple of times  and that's happened.
  Ten days, two weeks out, he just looks around and goes,  "5th of May," and we're like, "How does he know that?"  It's incredible.
 It's because he just has lived on this river  and lived this breakup for 50 years.
  Ice scientists are improving  the accuracy of their predictions all the time,  but in the meantime,  the people of Hay River have a remarkable guardian.
  Red, you were completely right this year.
  Are you right every year?  No, I miss  I miss the odd one.
  Yes.
 1985, I missed it.
 
                    Antarctica, a vast, ice-locked continent  larger than the United States and Mexico combined.
  This is the coldest, windiest, most lifeless place on Earth,  first explored by humans just 100 years ago.
  Today, this vast wilderness has become a giant laboratory  for the most important and cutting-edge science on our planet.
  Landing at the geographical South Pole,  the southernmost place on Earth, feels like visiting another planet.
  Ahead lies the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station,  one of the most sophisticated  scientific research facilities ever built.
  Despite sitting on top of the icecap at an altitude of almost 10,000 feet,  the station is maintained at a comfortable 20 degrees centigrade  throughout the year.
  It hosts scientists from a whole range of disciplines  and is home to two of the most powerful telescopes on Earth.
  As well as housing hi-tech kit, the base provides a life support system  for people to rest, work and play in relative comfort.
  This astonishing building is a triumph of technology and engineering  and is as close to a space station as you can find anywhere on Earth.
  But a station this big needs support.
  Each summer, a convoy of tractors brings in supplies  travelling along a snow road  nicknamed the McMurdo South Pole Highway,  a journey that takes more than four weeks.
  The goods they bring will help sustain the base for the next six months.
  Not long after the convoy departs, the sun sets for the last time.
  The Antarctic winter has begun.
  A long, dark night that will last for months.
  It's in the polar winter  that the comfort and safety of the South Pole Station  really comes into its own.
  Though the peak of research activity is in the summer,  the station functions all the year round  with a skeleton crew of 50 people, who spend the whole winter here.
  They have risen to the challenge of making a habitable environment  in one of the most inhospitable places on Earth  with a surprising installation, a greenhouse.
  Here, fresh fruit and vegetables are grown under artificial lights,  while the rest of the continent is in darkness.
  Regulations prevent soil from being imported to the Antarctic,  so the vegetables are grown using a system of hydroponics.
  Their roots are held directly in contact with water  loaded with nutrients.
  Inside here, it's a comfortable 25 degrees Celsius.
  Relative humidity is about 55%.
  Outside, the temperature will be at least -30 degrees Celsius,  and as the winter really starts to get going,  it'll get as far down as -80 degrees Celsius.
  So it's pretty cold outside.
  And this will be the brightest environment  one can find in Antarctica, I believe.
  This greenhouse is so hi-tech  that the team can control the amount of food and light the plants receive  from the comfort of their office in the University of Arizona.
  But to really appreciate the achievements of modern science  at the South Pole, one must go back 100 years,  to when science and exploration began here.
  In 1911, Robert Falcon Scott and his team  built this hut as a supply base  from which they would set off on their quest  to be the first humans to reach the South Pole.
  Little has changed.
 It's as if they only left yesterday.
  Unlike modern visitors to the South Pole,  these men had to bring everything they would need with them.
  Their crates of supplies came by ship,  containing materials to build the hut,  as well as food and clothes for the men.
  Ten thousand of these items still remain.
  All their food came in tins, which still line the shelves today,  while the bunks that this 25-man team slept in during their first winter  still look much as they did a century ago.
  While Scott and his men prepared for their race to the Pole,  the team carried out a variety of scientific experiments.
  They brought with them equipment for studying meteorology, geology,  and collecting specimens.
  Over the years, the hut fell into disrepair  until recently, a team began work  on the world's most remote restoration project.
  Their mission is to save the hut from being destroyed by the ice,  as well as to discover more  about early science and survival in Antarctica.
  The expedition was very well equipped with equipment and technology.
  And there was also a telephone, which they ran across the sea-ice  and linked various different places together.
  There's quite an elaborate system of switches and lights.
  Interior-exterior electric light bulbs,  which would have been very cutting-edge indeed.
  And an enormous amount of scientific equipment as well,  of all manner and all sorts.
  We're very fortunate that it's survived in the condition it has.
  I mean, the house was only intended to last for two, three years at most  and here we are, a century on.
  So we have this fabulous opportunity now, if we act quickly,  to preserve what's here for future generations.
  Scott and his men left the hut  on the 1st of November, 1911,  to begin their journey on foot to the South Pole.
  Ahead of them lay 800 miles  of the most challenging terrain on the planet.
  The route they chose through the Transantarctic Mountains  took them up the mighty Beardmore Glacier.
  Slowly they traversed its appalling surface,  until finally, they reached the ice plateau.
  They still faced a further 300-mile trek.
  The achievement to finally reaching the Pole was tainted  by the fact that the Norwegian Roald Amundsen had got there first.
  Scott and four others perished on their return journey.
  Sixteen kilos of rocks and fossils,  specimens that they had dragged back with them  were discovered close to where they died.
  Nobody stood at the Pole again for 44 years, until 1956,  when the first scientific base was established here.
  A small party from the United States Navy  landed supplies by plane  so they could build the first Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station,  six wooden huts in the midst of the barren icecap.
  That same year, a science party over-wintered,  the first humans ever to experience the longest, darkest winter on earth.
  The old wooden huts were replaced in the 1970s  with this gigantic dome.
  But this, too, has been superseded,  its panels dismantled and removed without trace in 2010,  as every manmade item must be in Antarctica.
  The most recent South Pole Station is designed to withstand extremes.
  Its curved sides funnel the wind and it stands on stilts  that can be raised to accommodate the build-up of snow,  which accumulates at a rate of 20 centimeters every year.
  All this is a far cry from the bleak white emptiness  that confronted Amundsen and Scott.
  They would be truly amazed to see what exists here today.
  Science has come a long way in the last century,  yet the goals of those who come here are in many ways still the same.
  This is a place where scientists look to the skies,  releasing weather balloons twice a day  to collect vital data about the level of ozone in our atmosphere.
  The South Pole is also said to have the cleanest air on Earth,  which has been sampled here  at the Atmospheric Research Observatory for the last 50 years,  giving a long-term baseline for gases such as carbon dioxide, or CO2,  data that is crucial to modern climate science.
  Climate change is a really hot topic right now  and it's really important that we monitor the levels of CO2.
  Basically, we want to know how much it's increasing  or how much it's decreasing or  This long-term record really displays that very well.
  Especially down here, we get a really good global average  because there's no local influences.
  We can tell what the level is without being right next to a city.
  And it's not just the current climate  which can be studied here.
  The ice of the South Pole is the perfect place  to investigate our past.
  This is the Ice Cube facility,  the powerhouse for an enormous underground system of sensors  that uses the pristine Antarctic ice  as a natural laboratory in which to study  the beginning of the whole universe.
  Ice Cube covers a cubic kilometer but is buried deep below the surface.
  A heated drill is used to melt holes  one and a half miles down into the icecap,  a process that takes about 48 hours.
  Into the holes are lowered chains of photo detectors,  which look for tiny ghost-like particles passing through the ice.
  The particles are called neutrino,  formed billions of years ago after the birth of the universe.
  Neutrinos are extremely difficult to detect,  but as they pass through the earth and enter the pure, transparent ice,  they occasionally crash into atoms,  sparking tiny flashes of blue light that reveal their existence.
  Ice Cube is a neutrino telescope.
  So, it's like a regular telescope.
  We're trying to make an image of the universe,  but instead of using light, we're using particles.
  What they learn  from mapping the direction of these particles  will provide a fascinating insight  into the cosmos and the very beginning of time.
  While Antarctica's ice can help us understand our past,  it also holds information which is very relevant to the present.
  This long-range DC-3 plane was built in 1942,  but has been fitted with very modern ground-penetrating radar,  which can effectively see through the ice.
  The plane is a mobile lab,  from which scientists can map the miles of unexplored landscape,  not just at the surface, but deep below, where the ice meets rock.
  This airplane is called an aero geodesical platform.
  And a platform like this allows you  to combine multiple data sets.
  In this case we have 14 instruments, operating simultaneously.
  And each of them has a role in characterizing  the geology and the glaciology  in the Antarctic region that we're flying in right now.
  Much of the ice that covers Antarctica  is over two and a half miles thick.
  It cloaks mountain ranges, volcanoes and lakes  and in places, its weight depresses the land far below sea level.
  It's just incredible, the things that are down there  that you would just never know without these instruments.
  When you look out the window,  all you see is ice as far as the eye can see,  and you very well may be flying over  a mountain range the size of the Rockies.
  Being in Antarctica is just a very special experience.
  It's an honor to be a part of a program  that is acquiring such important data  for building understanding of our natural environment  that's hard to reach.
  Far from being static, Antarctica's ice is on the move,  flowing out from the thickest part of the ice sheet towards the coast.
  What's more, the ice is changing fast.
  It's hard to imagine, but if all this ice melted,  it would contribute more than 60 meters to our global sea levels.
  Scientific programs like this one are vital.
  We need to know the volume of this ice  and better understand how it behaves  before we can predict the long-term future of this icecap  and what that in turn means for the rest of us.
  The place where change is happening most rapidly  is around the edges of the ice sheet,  where the ice flows out over the sea.
  And that is where much scientific attention  is now being focused.
  Well, I've been working down here for 25 years.
  But I have never felt such a sense of urgency  as I do with this particular project.
  We know the sea level is rising right now.
  It has been rising for the last century.
  But it's rising faster now than it was before.
  And we expect that acceleration to continue.
  To understand what the ocean is doing to the ice,  we have to get into the ocean.
  And the path to get to the ocean is through that ice shelf.
  So, we use a hot water drill  to make a hole, just melt a hole all the way through the ice shelf.
  And through that hole then we can deploy our ocean profiler.
  This ocean profiler is a specially designed recording device  which is dropped through the ice sheet to the ocean below.
  It's a unique and expensive piece of equipment.
  It's about as tense a deployment as I've ever made.
  There's no spares of this thing.
 So far, so good.
  But you never really know how it's all going to work out  until you're out here in the field doing it.
  Over the coming months,  the ocean profiler will transmit information  about what's happening below this ice shelf  back to a lab in Monterey.
  It's going to be telling us the type of water  that's coming in underneath the ice  and the type of water that leaves the ice.
  And from that difference, we know what it's done to the ice,  how much ice has been melted, because it's that melting of ice  that thins the ice shelf and that ice shelf  A thinner ice shelf can't hold the ice sheet back as well.
  So, once the ice shelf thins, that glacier accelerates.
  What we're doing down here is so important because  sea level all around the world will be affected  as Antarctica shrinks.
  And almost half of the world's population  lives close to the coast and is affected by changes in sea level.
  Antarctica may feel like the other end of the planet,  but anything that happens here affects us all.
  We may think of this continent as being frozen in time,  but in fact, the ice has a life of its own.
  And nowhere is that more clearly illustrated  than at the South Pole itself,  which before and since mankind visited it,  has continued to be on the move.
  Hi, first and foremost I'd like to thank each and every one of you  for showing up here today.
  It's fantastic to see such a large turnout  for these traditions of the South Pole.
  What we're here today for is the annual remarking  of the geographic South Pole.
  Now, as you all know, the South Pole Station, our home,  sits on top of a 3,000 meter deep polar icecap.
  And that icecap moves at about a rate of 10 meters every year.
  Or if you prefer, probably about 2.
7 centimeters every day.
  It is my honor to present to you guys,  on behalf of the winter-over crew of 2009,  the geographic South Pole marker for 2010.
  It carries the inscription of the name of every member of the winter-over crew.
  With this, I would like to invite all of you  to participate in relocating this marker,  the new, accurately placed geographic South Pole.
  The ceremonial marker and Antarctic Treaties state flags  serve as a reminder that Antarctica belongs to no one,  but is reserved for the interests of science  and the progress of all mankind.
 
                    The polar regions are the coldest, most extreme places on our planet.
  Winds reach 200 miles an hour  and temperatures drop as low as minus 70 degrees centigrade.
  Only the toughest can survive here.
  Over the course of a year, polar animals must overcome  not just the cold, but the most extreme seasonal changes on Earth.
  In the High Arctic, winter is one long night that lasts for months.
  On lee-side slopes, beneath the snow, new lives are beginning.
  The cubs are born blind and tiny.
  An early birth is easier on the mother, who is barely awake.
  Despite her sleepiness, her instinct  to nurse is overwhelming.
  CUBS SQUEAK  The cubs' clucking calls  stimulate her to produce milk.
  And what milk!  It's nine times richer than our own,  and enables her to double  their weight every few weeks.
  The sun is returning after an absence of nearly four months.
  And its warmth starts to transform this magical ice world.
  Spring has arrived.
  The greatest seasonal change on our planet is now under way.
  Antarctica is still locked in ice,  and surrounded by a frozen ocean.
  Nonetheless, there are signs of spring.
  Adelie penguins are arriving.
 Just the males.
  They've spent five months at sea,  where it's warmer than it is on land,  and now they're in a hurry,  for spring will be short.
  They have travelled 6,000 miles across the ocean  since leaving their colony last year and now, they're returning to breed.
  They cannot lay their eggs on ice for they would freeze.
  So they have to come here, where there is bare rock.
  Over the coming months,  the few parts of Antarctica that are ice-free will be the stage  on which five million Adelies will build their nests.
  To construct one, they need pebbles.
  And without a good-looking nest,  a male will be unable to attract a female.
  It takes stones of all shapes and sizes to build a decent nest  and finding ones that are just right is not easy.
  So, some penguins turn to a life of crime.
  The one who has been robbed seems unaware  that the thief is just over his shoulder and looking for more.
  The thief's nest is coming along nicely, probably because  he keeps a particularly sharp lookout for robbers.
  After all, it takes one to know one.
  By fair means or foul, the males must finish their nests quickly  if they're to raise a family over the short Antarctic summer.
  In the north of our planet,  the weak sunshine is a welcome relief after the months of darkness.
  Finally, it's time for polar bear families to emerge from their dens.
  This is not the easiest place  to take your first steps.
  And the little ones will need plenty  of encouragement from their mother.
  If she can raise all three to independence,  it will be a rare achievement.
  During the months underground, all they've known is their mother.
  Now, the big, wide world holds all sorts of challenges  for these brave, young explorers.
  The mother leads her new family out over the frozen sea  to hunt for seals.
  But the spring melt is already under way.
  All across the Arctic, the sun's warming effect is increasing.
  Sea ice is showing the first signs of weakening.
  Inland, the northern rivers are still locked in ice.
  The frozen waterfalls are like dams, holding back billions of tonnes  of fresh water that has not moved for almost six months.
  CREAKING  The vast watershed lies motionless.
  But as spring advances,  it begins to stir.
  The frozen waterfalls start to weaken.
  Above them, the pressure is mounting.
  Now, from high above, whole sections can be seen to be on the move.
  The waterfalls are straining to hold back the force  that is building up above them.
  The dam bursts  and the river is unleashed.
  These vast floods accelerate the breakup.
  Soon, an area of sea ice the size of Australia  will vanish from the Arctic Ocean.
  The spring melt breaks the ice for visitors.
  Narwhals.
  The unicorns of the North are on a mission to reach  the new fishing grounds in the bays that have been frozen up all winter,  but are now opening up.
  To get to them, the narwhals must travel down leads,  temporary cracks in the ice.
  But these new roads could close at any time,  cutting off the air that they need to breathe.
  The road narrows, until there's barely room for one-way traffic.
  Then, a surprise.
 Narwhals coming from the other direction.
  It's a stand-off.
 Each team faces an armoury of sharp tusks.
  Finally, one side concedes.
  And everyone continues in the same direction.
  The melting sea ice reveals open ocean.
  And the changes on land are no less dramatic.
  Beneath the snow, life is already stirring.
  The Arctic tundra is unveiled.
  Water that has been locked in ice all winter  once again flows freely.
  A landscape that was only white now bursts with colour.
  Migrants begin arriving from the south  and, suddenly, the tundra is alive with new families.
  These Arctic wolf cubs are just over a month old  and always looking out for their next meal.
  Their parents have been hunting.
  Their offerings are devoured instantly.
  Arctic hare is a mainstay of the tundra diet  and one the cubs seem particularly keen on.
  Uneaten food is usually hidden for leaner times,  but there will be no leftovers today.
  The cubs are growing fast and are always hungry.
  The good times are certainly back, but these white wolves remind us  of the Arctic's less welcoming side.
  Their coats are pale to conceal them  during the long, snowy winter.
  It's easy to forget that one month ago,  this land was a barren, white desert.
  But finding a decent meal here is never easy.
  The parents travel up to 80 miles in a day in search of  more substantial prey for their growing family.
  Musk oxen are immensely powerful.
  And their sharp horns can kill.
  But a calf is more vulnerable.
  The two wolves work together to split the herd  and isolate their victim.
  It seems that the wolf cubs will, at last, eat well.
  But the herd regroups.
  The cattle ride to the rescue.
  The wolves cannot penetrate the wall of horns.
  The herd are protecting their calf.
  For the musk oxen, it's all for one  and one for all.
  It's a struggle for all polar animals to feed themselves  and their families in the brief Arctic summer.
  But there is one tiny creature of the tundra that has found  an astounding solution to the shortness of the season.
  The woolly bear caterpillar.
  It's always the first insect to appear after the snow's retreat.
  The caterpillar then eats as fast as it can and, indeed it must,  for this far north, summer only lasts a few weeks.
  The days shorten only too soon, but the caterpillar has not yet  got enough reserves to transform itself into a moth.
  It can't leave the Arctic, for it can't fly.
  So, it settles down beneath a rock.
  The sun's warmth rapidly dwindles.
  Beneath the rock, the caterpillar is out of the wind,  but the cold penetrates deep into the ground.
  Soon, its heart stops beating.
  It ceases to breathe and its body starts to freeze.
  First, its gut.
 Then, its blood.
  After four months of darkness,  the Arctic begins to thaw.
  And the caterpillar rises from the dead.
  By the time the first shoots of willow appear in the early spring,  the woolly bear is already eating.
  But no matter how fast the woolly bear eats,  it will not have time to gather enough food this year either,  and the cold closes in once again.
  Year after year, the caterpillar slows down in the autumn  and then freezes solid.
  But, eventually, a very special summer arrives.
  This one will be its last.
  It's now 14 years old.
  The world's oldest caterpillar.
  Its remaining days now become frantic.
  It starts to weave a silk cocoon.
  Inside, its body is changing  into one that can fly and search.
  Abilities that will be crucial in the days ahead.
  All across the Arctic, moths are emerging.
  After completing their 14-year preparation,  they now have just a few days to find a partner and mate.
  No life illustrates more vividly the struggle to survive  in this most seasonal of places.
  In a matter of weeks, the north will be frozen over once again.
  At the southern end of our planet,  Antarctica is still surrounded by sea ice.
  The Antarctic spring arrives first at the outer islands.
  Although the beaches of South Georgia are now ice-free,  the King Penguins face a new challenge.
  Their peaceful waterfront has turned into an obstacle course of blubber.
  The elephant seals have arrived.
  The beachmaster's authority is being challenged.
  This rival means business.
  The beachmaster owns the females here and must to fight keep them.
  The beachmaster himself weighs four tonnes, but this rival is his equal.
  The beachmaster has won the first battle,  but he may have to defend his harem every hour for the next month.
  If he can stay master of his beach for this period,  many of the young born here next year will be his.
  In summer, the Southern Ocean bursts with life.
  No bird is more at home in water, and they are masterful surfers.
  Penguins are found only in the Southern Hemisphere.
  They can't fly, but they don't need to.
 There are no polar bears here.
  These are Gentoo Penguins.
  Each spring, they come ashore to lay their eggs and rear their young.
  Their hungry chicks demand  so much seafood that both parents have to go fishing.
  And fishing can be dangerous.
  A southern sea lion.
  It uses the speed of a breaking wave to catch up with the Gentoos.
  Sea lions normally eat fish,  so he's used to catching streamline swimmers.
  But the Gentoos seem more than his match out at sea.
  He must change tactics.
  Perhaps it would be easier in the shallows.
  But, no, it seems penguins are uncatchable in water.
  How about on land?  The penguin's wings, so powerful for swimming,  are of no help when it comes to running.
  Now, surely, the sea lion has a chance?  But on the beach, both are like fish out of water.
  Rarely do hunter and hunted play their roles with so little skill.
  The outcome is anyone's guess.
  Every summer, over 40 million penguins  take to the Southern Ocean to feed.
  They're joined by thousands of whales.
  Minkes are the most numerous.
  They all come here to harvest the richest ocean on Earth.
  Southern humpbacks have travelled 4,000 miles from the equator  to get here in time for the Antarctic summer.
  Each year, the sea ice that surrounds Antarctica melts,  effectively halving the size of the continent  and exposing rich waters around its coastline.
  It's the most spectacular seasonal change occurring  anywhere on our planet.
  The remnants of the sea ice are occupied by sunbathing seals  that have been here all winter.
  But new arrivals are following the retreating ice edge.
  And they have come here to hunt.
  Killer whales.
 The ocean's top predator.
  Killers are like wolves,  for they will hunt animals far larger than themselves.
  But even smaller prey are a problem  if you can't reach them.
  The solution is teamwork.
  Swimming in perfect formation, they flick their tails in unison  and create a wave that cracks the ice.
  They regroup and assess the damage.
  A more powerful wave is needed.
  The ice floe is breaking up.
  Now, they are close enough to get a good look at their target.
  The seal is a crabeater, sharp-toothed and feisty.
  Not their favourite.
  The wolves of the sea move on  in search of easier quarry.
  A Weddell seal, that's better.
  These are more docile and easier to tackle.
  The pod stays close together and travels silently.
  This time, they unleash a far more powerful wave,  and with astonishing accuracy.
  These big waves are not intended to break the ice,  but to knock the prey into the water,  and they rarely fail.
  The seal is now where the killers wanted.
  But the hunt is far from over.
  They need to grab their prey by the tail,  while avoiding its snapping jaws.
  Only then will they be able to pull it down and drown it.
  Side swipes create violent, underwater turbulence, a new tactic.
  Blowing bubbles gives cover for others to lunge at the seal's tail.
  Somehow, the seal manages to reach a tiny ice floe.
  The killers could easily grab it,  but now, this seems to have become a game.
  The seal's life hangs on a roll of the ice.
  Yet again, the pod joins forces to dislodge the seal.
  The seal sees a chance to escape.
  Exhausted, it no longer has the energy to pull itself to safety.
  And the killers are moving in.
  Game over.
  As the Antarctic summer draws to an end, visitors that rely on the brief  flush of food will soon be forced north by the return of the sea ice.
  For the largest land predator, the sea ice cannot return soon enough.
  The end of the Arctic summer and the sun hasn't set for three months.
  It's hard to imagine the bitter cold will soon return.
  Some will welcome the chills of autumn but, for most,  time is running out before they will have to retreat to the south.
  The shorter days and colder nights trigger  a dramatic change in the willows and blueberry bushes.
  They stop producing the green pigment that harnesses  the sun's energy, and red and yellow pigments build up in their leaves.
  The tundra blazes with colour  and the whole landscape is transformed.
  The sound of autumn.
  The musk ox rut has begun.
  This clash of polar titans could easily become a fight  to the death, as males battle over females.
  A heavy skull and helmet of horn, four inches thick,  provide some protection for the musk ox's brain.
  The impact is like a car crash at 30 miles an hour.
  Over the next half hour,  the advantage ebbs and flows, as each tries to finish the duel.
  If one can turn the other  and gore its flank, the fight will be over.
  The stakes rise as the risk of injury, or even death, increases.
  This male is outmanoeuvred.
  And the champion returns to claim his females.
  By now, most animals have migrated south.
  But the musk ox, with their thick coats,  will stay and face the approaching winter.
  The moisture in the air freezes and hoarfrost decorates the leaves.
  Ice crystals grow like shards of glass on every twig.
  As the sun's influence continues o dwindle here in the north,  the freeze pushes into the tree line,  spreading over one fifth of the planet.
  The northern forests lock down for winter.
  The last running water freezes and cathedrals of ice are formed.
  The great waterfalls of the north shut down.
  The stage is now set for a magical event.
  The formation of snowflakes.
  Cold air meets warm air from the south  and the moisture it carries crystallises.
  All have a six-fold symmetry,  but no two have ever been found with exactly the same shape.
  Each snowflake is water waiting to be released in spring.
  For this reason, snow is the life blood of these silent forests  and all that live here depend on it in one way or another.
  Some, like the Great Grey Owl,  appear in spring for the boom times, then vanish like phantoms.
  Stooped, shrouded figures bear the weight of winter's heavy snows.
  The heavy snows make it  hard to get around,  even for the largest and  most powerful wolves in the world.
  Today, they are setting out to hunt.
  The pack is 25-strong,  a sign that the prey they are seeking is formidable.
  The largest land animal in North America.
  Bison.
  The bison form a defensive circle around their young,  horns pointing outwards.
  The wolves need a bison to break rank.
  But the tables are turning and now the wolves have to retreat.
  The pack focus their attention on the rear of the herd  and the bison begin to panic.
  A young bison falls behind.
  Even this yearling dwarfs the wolves.
  Running head down,  the herd's only thought is escape.
  A stroke of luck for the wolves.
  The kill will feed the pack for several days.
  But then, they will have to resume the chase.
  At the frozen ends of our planet,  the struggle for survival never eases.
  For a few, the snow is an ally.
  Voles stay active throughout the winter, moving between pockets  of perfectly refrigerated food in a network of tunnels.
  These tunnels are a sanctuary from predators.
  Except one.
  The least weasel is a tiny hunter  and the vole's nemesis.
  Its body is exactly  the same width as a vole's,  so there's nowhere a vole can go that a weasel can't follow.
  The weasel's long slender shape is perfect for hunting in tunnels,  but the worst possible shape for staying warm.
  So, they need a special way of doing that.
  She plucks the fur from its body, tuft by tuft.
  And now, she puts it all together to make a cosy blanket,  under which to sleep in her den.
  100 miles above the Earth, the aurora lights up the sky.
  After travelling millions of miles across space, solar winds, attracted  by the magnetic pull of the Poles, collide with the Earth's atmosphere.
  Trillions of charged particles dance across the sky.
  Above the Arctic, the aurora borealis, the northern lights.
  In the south, it's the aurora australis,  the southern lights, that bring light to Antarctica's long winter.
  These spectacular light shows are only a tease.
  Solar energy maybe, but no warmth that will help the Emperor Penguins.
  The male penguins have not eaten for months and have only each other  for protection from hurricane-force winds.
  They have been deserted by the females, left to incubate  their eggs throughout the worst winter on Earth.
  The Emperors are not entirely alone.
  The Weddell seal.
  The only mammal to remain here throughout the winter.
  Beneath the ice, they are beyond the reach of the bitter winter winds.
  The sea is minus two degrees centigrade.
  A warm bath compared to the conditions overhead.
  The roof of ice insulates this world  from the wild fluctuations above.
  The temperature down here has barely changed for 25 million years.
  There could hardly be a greater contrast  to the bleak, windswept world just above.
  But there is a constant danger here.
  Swirling patterns in the water reveal its presence.
  They're made by brine, super-concentrated salt water.
  It's a warning.
  New sea ice forming above leaves behind brine  that is so extremely salty, it sinks rapidly.
  As it descends, the sea water around it freezes instantly  and forms a sheath of ice.
  A brinicle that grows downwards towards the sea floor.
  Winter is reaching down from the cold world above.
  As it touches the sea floor, it kills whatever living thing  it contacts by encasing it in a tomb of ice.
  As calm returns beneath the ice,  a dramatic change is coming to the world above.
  The sun returns to Antarctica.
  The longest night on Earth has ended  and winter begins to give way to spring.
  Female Emperor Penguins.
  After four months feeding at sea, they're returning sleek and fat.
  Penguins, it seems, can fly after all.
  But a winter at sea has left them a little out of practice.
  There is no time to waste.
 Faraway, the males are waiting.
  Reunited after three months apart.
  The reward for the female's return,  a first glimpse of her chick.
  A task that began in autumn has been completed.
  Despite the huge odds against it,  the precious chick has survived the winter and is now with its mother.
  And she has food.
  The chick's first fresh meal.
  The female's mission is complete.
  For those Emperor Penguins that survive,  the worst is over for this year.
  There will soon be abundant food for everyone.
  The Emperors have taken on the polar winter and won.
  The gamble has paid off.
  All other animals escaped.
  Only they remained with their eggs,  and it's they who will benefit most from the rich southern spring.
  Their epic journey is complete.
 
                     The oceans seemingly limitless,  invoke in us a sense of awe and wonder and also sometimes fear.
  They cover 70% of the surface of our planet,  and yet they are still the least explored.
  Hidden beneath the waves right beneath my feet,  there are creatures beyond our imagination.
  With revolutionary technology, we can enter new worlds  and shine the light on behaviours  in ways that were impossible just a generation ago.
  We've also recognized an uncomfortable fact.
  The health of our ocean is under threat.
  They're changing at a faster rate than ever before in human history.
  Never has there been a more crucial time  to reveal what is going on beneath the surface of the seas.
  In this first episode,  we will journey across the globe from the warm waters of the tropics  to the coldest around the poles.
  To bring us a new understanding of live beneath the waves.
  This is Blue Planet II.
  The surface of the ocean conceals the many creatures that live beneath  but not all.
  Bottlenose dolphins.
  They're extremely intelligent.
  And with this intelligence comes playfulness.
  They surf.
  And as far as we can tell, they do so for the sheer joy of it.
  But to properly appreciate their true character,  you have to travel with them into their world.
  A pod of bottlenose dolphins is visiting a coral reef in the Red Sea.
  For the youngsters, there are things to be learned here.
  The adults lead a calf to a particular bush-like coral  called a Gorgonian.
  And here, the adults behave rather strangely.
  They deliberately rub themselves through the fronds.
  Their calf seems reluctant to do so.
  By watching his elders,  he may be realizing that this is something he ought to do.
  Gorgonia fronds, in fact, are covered with a mucous  that can have anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties.
  So maybe the adult dolphins are doing this  to protect themselves from infection.
  The dolphins' intimate knowledge of the reef  is spurring us to search for new medicines here, too.
  Tropical coral reefs  occupy only a tenth of one percent of the ocean floor.
  But their shallow warm waters and stable year round conditions,  support some of the most crowded and varied communities  to be found anywhere in the oceans.
  And there are new discoveries to be made on every one of them.
  One creature on Australia's Great Barrier Reef  is challenging our understanding of fish intelligence.
  A tusk fish.
  And you can see why it gets its name.
  He does something few would have believed a fish could do.
  Every morning, he travels to the edge of the reef.
  He's searching for something special to eat  amongst the coral and sand.
  Here's one.
  A small clam.
  But how to crack it open and get to the meat?  He takes it all the way back  to his special kitchen.
  A bowl-shaped coral  that has a particular bump on the inside that he always uses.
  It's not easy if you have no hands.
  Whoops.
  There he goes again.
  But he's got great determination  and surprising accuracy.
  At last.
  So here is a fish that uses tools.
  Some fish are much cleverer than you might suppose.
  The density of the animals on tropical reefs  makes competition inevitable and extreme.
  Not only for those that lived within the reef,  but for the birds that fly above them.
  During the dry season,  over half a million terns  crowd onto this remote atoll in the Indian Ocean.
  Their chicks are still in their dark, juvenile plumage.
  They vary in age.
  Whilst the more advanced chicks take to the air,  others aren't quite ready yet.
  Those just starting to learn to fly  use the shallow lagoon that occupies the centre of the atoll  as their training ground.
  It's difficult for some of them to stay aloft for long.
  Giant trevallies.
  Usually, they're solitary hunters,  but about 50 of them have come here from neighbouring reefs  attracted by this abundance of potential prey.
  The fledglings stay out of the water if they can,  they even drink on the wing.
  If the trevally are to catch one now,  they have to up their game.
  So there is a fish here that amazingly  has a brain capable of calculating the airspeed,  altitude and trajectory of a bird.
  The time comes when every fledgling has to take to the air  and collect food for itself.
  Their parents lead them to the training grounds.
  If they're to survive,  they must learn quickly.
  After a month of practising over the lagoon,  the youngsters start to leave  and take their chances out over the open sea.
  The oceans hold 97% of all the water in the world.
  As the sun warms their surface, water evaporates.
  The vapour rises into the sky  until it cools and condenses into towering clouds.
  And they generate huge storms.
  The spin of the earth deflects these storms  north and south into cooler latitudes.
  As they travel across the sea,  storm-driven winds create huge swells.
  When the swells reach shallower waters,  they rise into gigantic waves.
  In its lifetime, a large storm can release energy  that is the equivalent of 10,000 nuclear bombs.
  These are the seasonal seas.
  And when they warm in spring,  they can suddenly explode with life.
  Mobula rays have gathered in Mexico's Sea of Cortez  in vast numbers.
  Why do they leap?  Is it to tell others that they're here?  No one knows.
  They feed mostly at night  for that is when vast swarms of plankton rise from the depths.
  The disturbance in the water  stimulates many of the planktonic creatures to luminesce.
  Only now do we have the technology to record their faint glow.
  The feasting rays swim through them  creating an extraordinary ballet of life and death.
  The richness of these waters is based on microscopic plants,  phytoplankton,  which bloom on such a massive scale they benefit us all.
  They, together with seaweeds and seagrasses,  produce as much oxygen  as all the forests and grassy plains on land.
  Every spring off New Zealand,  the seasonal bounty draws in rare visitors.
  False killer whales.
  They're relatives of the orca,  six metres long and weighing over a tonne.
  They appear to be searching for dolphins.
  And there are many in these coastal waters.
  Here, bottlenose dolphins stick together  constantly chattering with whistles and clicks.
  Such a din carries for miles underwater.
  The false killers have detected them.
  Travelling at ten knots, the killers quickly close in on them.
  But then, something truly extraordinary happens.
  The dolphins turn  as if to greet their pursuers.
  They seem to change their course.
  Could it be that they're attempting to communicate?  Scientists studying this annual encounter,  now think that individuals may recognize one another.
  Almost unbelievably, it seems that these different species  appear to be old friends.
  Together they're gathering as one unified army  up to a thousand strong.
  This formidable hunting party now harvests the riches  that come with New Zealand's summer.
  All across the higher latitudes,  seasonal seas flourish under the summer sun.
  Here in Alaska, sea otters lounge in the canopy  of great submarine forests.
  Giant kelp, the biggest seaweed of all is home to all kinds of life.
  On the forest floor, spiny sea urchins munch through the kelp.
  Elsewhere there are continuously hungry sea cucumbers  And in the tangled undergrowth,  wonderfully camouflaged sea dragons.
  In the underwater forests of northern Japan,  the residents of this sunken wreck  are waiting for the summer temperatures to reach 16 degrees Celsius.
  That for some is the time for mating.
  A kind of giant wrasse called a Kobudai.
  This is a male.
  And in female terms, he's particularly handsome.
  He's a metre long and weighs 15 kilos.
  Much larger than the diminutive female,  and he is ready to breed.
  He attempts to mate with her  and with any of the dozen or so females that live in his territory,  whenever he gets the chance.
  But females from around ten years old  take little notice of his advances.
  This is because when any large female reaches a critical body size,  she can begin a dramatic transformation.
  Over just a few months,  particular enzymes inside her body cease to work,  and male hormones start to circulate.
  As time passes,  her head expands  and her chin gets longer.
  A she has changed into a he.
  And with this comes a change in temperament.
  The old male who rules all the females here  is challenged to a face off.
  The more bulbous the head,  the more it intimidates an opponent.
  The territory has a new ruler.
  Only the largest females transform themselves in this way.
  But the change enables them to have more mates,  so they will have many more offspring carrying their genes.
  But a new male can't afford to be complacent.
  Inside the body of every Kobudai female,  there is a new male in waiting.
  The closer we travel towards the poles, the colder the seas become.
  Icebergs appear.
  Huge slabs that have broken away  from glaciers that are sliding into the sea.
  And then the surface starts to freeze.
  While the lights of the aurora play above,  even in the depths of midwinter,  there are a few places well north of the Arctic circle  that are still open.
  The fjords of northern Norway remain ice free  because a giant current, the Gulf Stream,  flows up here from the south  bringing warmth all the way from the Caribbean.
  And every winter,  billions of herring come here for shelter.
  And following them  Orca.
  There are up to a thousand of them.
  It's possibly the greatest gathering of orca on the planet.
  The herring maybe plentiful but in these winding fjords  they're not always easy to track down.
  These particular orca, however,  are fish hunting specialists.
  They work as a team,  coordinating their approach by calling loudly to one another.
  They herd the herring into tighter and tighter shoals.
  They swim below them,  trapping them against the surface of the sea.
  And now the orca deploy their special weapon.
  They beat their tails with such force,  that the shock waves stun the herring.
  And then the senseless victims are easily collected.
  But all this underwater noise attracts others.
  Humpback whales.
  They move in on the action.
  They approach the shoal from beneath and then lunge upwards,  gathering up to a hundred kilos of herring in a single mouthful.
  The humpbacks are comparative newcomers.
  They only started coming here within the last decade.
  But these polars seas are so rich  that there appears to be enough food for everyone.
  Nonetheless, few if any of these riches  would be here were it not for the Gulf Stream.
  Ocean currents, in fact, are crucial to the well being of our planet.
  They distribute the sun's heat towards the poles  all the way from the equator,  maintaining a climate favourable for life almost everywhere.
  From creating the weather to producing oxygen,  the seas keep our world healthy.
  But there are now worrying signs  that conditions in the oceans  that have remained relatively stable for millennia  are changing radically.
  Nowhere is this more evident than in the Arctic.
  Here in the past 30 years,  the extent of the ice in summer has been reduced by 40%.
  This sudden warming,  most likely a consequence of human activity,  is having a profound impact on its wildlife.
  Walruses are among those that are seriously affected.
  Every adult female needs to find a safe place  where her 80-kilo pup can rest.
  The sea ice is retreating  from much of the walrus' traditional range,  so they now have to haul out on dry land.
  But a herd of hundreds of quarrelsome mothers,  some weighing almost a tonne, is not an ideal nursery.
  Walruses on land stick together for good reason.
  Polar bears.
  A full grown male walrus is gigantic,  too big for even a polar bear to tackle.
  So the bear is looking for a walrus baby.
  The scent of the bear spreads alarm through the colony.
  The walruses retreat into the sea.
  The bear knows it won't be able to catch them there.
  But she too has young ones to feed.
  What is a mother to do?  A mother walrus still needs to find a place  where her young can rest.
  A melting iceberg might do,  but she is not the first to find this one.
  Suitable places are already taken.
  Other mothers don't want to share.
  They, too, need a patch of ice where they can protect their young.
  A desperate mother has no choice but to barge her way in.
  So this time everyone loses.
  Finding the right place on these melting shores  gets harder and harder.
  Solving these problems together helps create a bond so strong  that the mother will stay in contact with her young for the rest of her life.
  But who knows now what their future will be.
  As we understand more about the complexity  of the lives of sea creatures,  so we begin to appreciate the fragility of their home.
  Our blue planet.
  Blue Planet II has been four years in the making.
  The teams have explored every ocean,  seeking extraordinary untold stories,  many new to science.
  Bringing a new understanding of life beneath the waves.
  The latest diving technology producing no bubbles or noise  has allowed our teams longer and closer encounters.
  To explore our final frontier, the deep,  we have spent a thousand hours in submersibles  over half a mile below the surface.
  Innovative new camera technology  makes it possible to film moments never seen before.
  Low-light cameras capture magical events almost invisible to the naked eye.
  Probe cameras give a completely fresh perspective  into the lives of tiny creatures.
  Here he comes, here he comes.
  While suction cameras take us on a giant's eye view of the ocean.
  But the sea is an unpredictable and dangerous place to work.
  Nowhere more so than the so called wild coast of South Africa.
  Home to surfing dolphins.
  The team's mission here is to ride alongside the dolphins  and record their surfing behaviour in closer detail than ever before.
  These are treacherous seas,  so the film crew enlists local professional surfers to guide them.
  But this year, the waves are bigger than anyone had anticipated.
  A daunting prospect for surf cameraman, Chris Bryan.
  Yeah, I'm feeling pretty nervous, the, uh  It's a big swell out there.
  Really big swell.
 Like there's 20-foot waves out there,  and, um, yeah this will probably be the biggest seas I've ever been out in.
  No risks, no reward, I guess.
  Chris has a high-speed camera  to shoot super slow motion action in the waves.
  The challenge is to get as close to the wave-riding dolphins as possible.
  The good news is that the dolphins have been spotted on the horizon.
  Um, they said this was gonna be the biggest swell of the year and  Hey, I've never seen anything like this.
  This is much bigger that I'd possibly imagined.
  In these waves,  the only way to get out to the dolphins is with a jet ski.
  It's gonna be enough of a challenge for them  to just kind of weave their way out.
  At last, the driver's detailed knowledge  gets them safely through the massive breakers,  but the dolphins are nowhere to be seen.
  Leaving the crew to face the hair-raising task  of getting back to shore.
  Keep going, keep going!  Whoa!  MAN/fo  That was pretty wild, yeah.
  The wave actually hit the back of the sled,  and I was like, "Go, go.
 Get out of here, guys.
 Get out of here.
"  Heard a big bump and almost bounced off  trying to hold the camera and, um, just rode out of there,  but, yeah, it was hectic.
  Just another day at the office.
  The next day brings a sudden change in conditions.
  Plenty of dolphins  but a calmer sea.
  We've got a complete lack of any wave at all.
  Look out, look out, look out.
  As so often in the ocean,  if you know you're in the right place,  you just need the patience to wait for the perfect moment.
  A week later and a storm is once again brewing  off the wild coast and surf is building.
  Feel like a nervous excitement.
  The conditions are absolutely perfect.
 It's what we've been waiting for.
  And the dolphins seem to know it.
  But Chris is struggling to get a steady shot.
  Look at that.
  Hello, gentleman.
 Uh, this is tricky.
  Little tricky no the jet ski, uh, just trying to get the right angle.
  So, I'm gonna have a go on the zodiac  and hopefully have better luck on that one.
  The inflatable boat gives Chris a larger,  more stable filming platform.
  At last, he's in exactly the right place at exactly the right time.
  And the results are spectacular.
  That's amazing!  Mission accomplished.
  And this intimate footage is now available  as part of wider scientific studies.
  Supporting evidence that dolphins surf  to strengthen friendships, develop social skills  and for the sheer exhilaration of it.
  Next time.
  The deep.
  A world richer than we ever though possible,  where creatures thrive,  in the most extreme conditions on earth.
 
                    Antarctica.
  The coldest, the harshest and the most remote continent on Earth.
  No human being has ever descended into the depths that surround it  .
.
until now.
  INDISTINCT RADIO CHATTER  The deep ocean is as challenging to explore as space.
  We know more about the surface of Mars than we do about the  deepest parts of our seas.
  RADIO CHATTER  Now we can dive these uncharted depths to discover  what secrets lie beneath.
  INTENSE CREAKING  Sinking down beside the submerged wall of an iceberg,  we enter an unforgiving world.
  These waters are the coldest on Earth.
  As we descend into the deep, the pressure increases relentlessly.
  And the light from above all but disappears.
  Yet, incredibly  .
.
there is life here.
  We might have expected that, deep beneath the surface of  the polar seas, the waters would be truly barren.
  But in fact we find life here in unimaginable abundance.
  Nor is such great abundance confined to Antarctic waters.
  Currents carry this richness into the depths of almost every ocean  around the world.
  Astonishingly, in the deep sea,  there is more life than anywhere else on Earth.
  The sunlight fades and the seas darken.
  Here in the Pacific, 200 metres down,  we enter an alien world.
  The Twilight Zone -  a sea of eternal gloom.
  There are strange creatures here.
  A pyrosome.
  A tube of jelly two metres long that dwarfs a visitor from above -  an oceanic whitetip shark.
  Only a tiny amount of light filters down this far.
  Survival here means making the most of every last glimmer.
  A swordfish.
  Its eyes are as big as tennis balls,  to help it see in the perpetual dusk.
  A squid,  but this is one that lives only here.
  Its right eye looks permanently downwards.
  But its left eye is much bigger and trained upwards to detect the  silhouettes of prey swimming nearer the surface.
  No wonder it's nicknamed "the cockeyed squid".
  And even stranger.
  This is barreleye  .
.
a fish with a transparent head  filled with jelly so that it can look up through its skull.
  We now know that the Twilight Zone is a refuge for an incredible  90% of all fish in the ocean.
  Only at night do vast shoals of lanternfish migrate to the surface  to feed on tiny plankton.
  By day, they retreat back down here.
  Humboldt squid.
  Two metres long and 50 kilos in weight.
  Like most squid, they're voracious hunters.
  There are hundreds of them.
  They've found a shoal of lanternfish,  hiding 800 metres down, off the coast of South America.
  Their tentacles are armed with powerful suckers  with which they grab their prey.
  And when there are no more lanternfish to be found  .
.
they turn on each other.
  This squid has caught a smaller one in its tentacles.
  To hide its capture from the rest,  it releases a smokescreen of black ink.
  But then an even bigger one challenges it  .
.
and steals its catch.
  The Twilight Zone is the Humboldt squid's favoured hunting ground.
  They seldom go deeper  .
.
into the world of perpetual blackness below  .
.
The Midnight Zone.
  Two thirds of a mile from the surface, beyond the reach the sun.
  A giant black void,  larger than all the rest of the world's habitats combined.
  INDISTINCT RADIO CHATTER  There's life here  .
.
but not as we know it.
  Alien-like creatures produce dazzling displays of light.
  Nearly all animals need to attract mates and repel predators.
  This language of light is so widespread here that these signals  are probably the commonest form of communication  on the entire planet.
  And yet we still know little about them.
  Hunters illuminate themselves, and by doing so  attract inquisitive prey.
  This is fangtooth.
  It has the largest teeth for its size of any fish.
  There are pressure sensors all over its head and body which can detect  anything moving in the surrounding water.
  It's the Midnight Zone's most voracious fish.
  But prey use light as a distraction.
  A decoy of luminous ink.
  Down here, in this blackness  .
.
creatures live beyond the normal rules of time.
  Siphonophores are virtually eternal.
  They repeatedly clone themselves  .
.
some eventually growing longer than a blue whale.
  Down here it snows.
  Continuous clouds of organic debris  drift slowly down from above.
  This is food, and a whole variety  of filter feeders depend on it.
  Jellyfish  .
.
and delicate sea cucumbers.
  The 1% of marine snow they miss  eventually settles on the sea floor.
  Over millions of years it forms a layer of mud  up to a mile thick.
  It's an empty plain that covers  half the surface of our planet.
  The deep sea bed may at first appear lifeless  .
.
but it's home to a unique cast of mud-dwellers.
  The sea toad.
  It is an ambush predator with an enormous mouth  .
.
and infinite patience.
  This fish has been living for so long here  that its fins have changed  into something more useful.
  Feet.
  They help it shuffle about on the sea floor.
  The flapjack octopus.
  It hovers just above the surface of the mud as it delicately sifts  through it, searching for worms.
  But it can jet away at the first sign of danger.
  A sixgill shark as big as a great white.
  It may not have eaten for an entire year.
  It patrols the mud plains  using a minimum amount of energy.
  High above, the carcass of a huge  sperm whale is slowly decaying.
  This will be a bonanza for the creatures of the deep.
  Food, 30 tonnes of it.
  Finally, it settles on the ocean floor  .
.
and its presence is soon detected.
  Sixgill sharks have an exceptionally acute sense of smell.
  Just 25 minutes after the whale's carcass arrives  .
.
a sixgill finds it.
  Each bite releases blood into the current.
  The news that food is here spreads quickly.
  Two more ravenous sixgills arrive.
  Within 12 hours,  there are seven enormous sharks  jostling with one another as they compete to tear off mouthfuls.
  No-one is prepared to back off.
  24 hours later and a third of the carcass has gone.
  The first arrival has gorged until it's completely full.
  This single meal may be enough to sustain it for a whole year.
  Now the clean-up team arrives.
  Spider crabs carrying coral in their hind legs,  presumably as makeshift body armour.
  There are rock crabs here, too.
  They probably detected the carcass almost as soon as the sharks  .
.
but they can't move as fast.
  A month on, and over 30 species of  scavenger are clearing away the last  edible fragments.
  But now the scavengers are attracting their own predators.
  Scabbardfish, habitually swimming upright,  are picking them off one by one.
  Some of the whale's teeth have been dislodged as the skeleton starts to  fall apart.
  Four months later, there is nothing left but a few bones.
  But even they are food  .
.
for something.
  Zombie worms.
  They tunnel into the bones by injecting acid  .
.
and so reach the tiny amounts of fat that still remain there.
  It may take decades, but eventually  the last of the bones will crumble  and the whole 30-tonne carcass  will have been recycled.
  A whale fall is a temporary oasis  in the desert of the sea floor.
  But there are permanent oases here, too.
  Rocks projecting above the mud  provide anchorage for deep-sea corals.
  As far down as 3.
5 miles,  there are more species of coral in the deep  than on shallow tropical reefs.
  Without sunlight,  they rely solely on food drifting in the current.
  And they grow just a hair's breadth a year.
  But some of them can live for 4,000 years.
  They, like their shallow water relatives,  provide homes for all kinds of other creatures.
  Growing among the corals is one of the most beautiful of sponges.
  This is Venus' flower basket.
  These sponges have lodgers.
  Shrimps.
  There are plenty of predators on the reef,  so the shrimps are fortunate.
  Both this male and female were swept into this sponge  when they were tiny larvae,  along with the minute particles of  food on which the sponge feeds.
  They found each other and have been here ever since.
  Now they're full-grown  and the female is carrying eggs.
  Once hatched, the larvae will swim out through the sponge's walls.
  But the shrimps will never leave.
  They can't.
  They are now far too big to go out the way they came in,  and no doubt they will live longer here than they would  if they were wandering about on the reef unprotected.
  But how one of the simplest of all animals, a sponge,  is able to build such a complex structure,  to the great benefit of the shrimps  .
.
is a mystery  .
.
and surely a marvel.
  But today their timeless world is being reduced to rubble.
  As overfishing empties the surface waters of the seas,  trawlers have started to ransack the deep.
  Now countless numbers of the reefs  that have flourished here for millennia  lie in ruins.
  Over time, organic matter on the sea floor slowly decays  .
.
producing methane.
  In the Gulf of Mexico  these eruptions also release a super-salty liquid.
  Brine.
  Five times heavier than seawater,  it accumulates in great pools on the sea floor.
  It's difficult to make sense of the sight.
  A lake of concentrated saltwater, 15 metres deep  at the bottom of the sea.
  Around its margin, perhaps even more strangely,  there is a profusion of life.
  Giant mussels, that can live and grow for a century or more,  pack tightly together,  dwarfing the shrimps and squat lobsters that feed around them.
  Cutthroat eels, scavengers,  come to the shores of the brine lake in search of something edible.
  Some even venture into the brine.
  Spending too long in it  can send an eel into toxic shock.
  Its only hope is to rise above it.
  It manages to escape.
  Others are not so lucky.
  The brine embalms their bodies  .
.
and the casualties of decades  accumulate around the margins.
  But parts of the deep are even more hostile.
  In places, gigantic cracks stretch for many miles  across the ocean floor  .
.
canyons that plunge towards the centre of the Earth.
  Scans from survey vessels make it possible to graphically reconstruct  an image of this vast submarine landscape.
  The deepest of all, at almost seven miles,  is the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean.
  Even Mount Everest could disappear inside it.
  Down here, in these deep ravines,  it was once thought that nothing whatever could possibly survive.
  But there is life even here  .
.
a kind of sea slug.
  A so-called "sea pig".
  They, and other simple creatures, manage to survive on the  minuscule amount of food that drifts down here.
  Like this starfish,  they can withstand pressure equivalent of 50 jumbo jets  stacked on top of one another.
  A remote camera probe reveals  the most extraordinary discovery of all  .
.
the ethereal snailfish.
  At five miles down,  this is the deepest living fish so far discovered.
  No-one imagined that an animal as  complex as a fish could exist  in such extreme pressures.
  From the greatest depths to the uppermost limit of  the Twilight Zone, it seems that there is nowhere in the deep sea  where life of some kind can't survive.
  And we now think that the deep sea may well be  where life on Earth began.
  Here, in a world hidden within  the greatest geological feature on Earth  .
.
running right down the middle of the world's oceans,  an underwater mountain range, spanning the entire globe.
  The Mid-Ocean Ridge.
  In the South Pacific,  the ocean floor is being torn apart.
  Over three quarters of the planet's volcanic activity  occurs in the deep  .
.
almost all of it along the Mid-Ocean Ridge.
  But from this titanic violence come great riches.
  Gases and scalding water gush up through the crevices.
  Minerals condensing from these jets build up great chimneys  hydrothermal vents.
  This one, 30 metres tall,  has been named Godzilla.
  Astonishingly, we now know  that they hold as much life  as tropical rainforests.
  In places, half a million individual animals  are crammed into a single square metre.
  They depend entirely for their food on bacteria.
  And THEY feed on chemicals dissolved in the searingly hot fluid.
  Crabs consume the bacterial mats that coat their shells.
  Others maintain bacterial cultures  actually within their bodies.
  Shrimps carry such cultures in their mouthparts,  but that is a strategy fraught with danger.
  To provide sustenance for these microbes  the shrimps must dash into the hot vents  .
.
and that risks being boiled alive.
  In the last decade  the number of hydrothermal vents discovered has doubled.
  Every one has its own unique character and community.
  But perhaps the most important one of all is in the Atlantic.
  It has been named "The Lost City".
  Within its 60-metre towers,  something truly extraordinary is taking place.
  Under extremes of pressure and temperature, hydrocarbons -  the molecules that are the basic component of all living things -  are being created spontaneously.
  Indeed, many scientists now believe  that life on Earth may have begun  around a vent like this,  four billion years ago.
  We now know that there are deep seas  on the moons of Jupiter and Saturn.
  If life can exist under such  extreme conditions down here,  then surely it could exist  somewhere out there.
  The team spent more than 1,000 hours filming in the deep ocean,  mostly from the research vessel Alucia and her twin submersibles,  Deep Rover and Nadir.
  Their most ambitious mission was to Antarctica,  hoping to film life two thirds of a mile down,  something never attempted before.
  We honestly do not know what we're going to find down there.
  We're going to a place that has never been explored.
  There could be nothing, there could be a carpet of life,  there could be anything in between.
 Who knows?  It's a huge technical challenge.
  The water temperature here can reach minus 1.
8 Centigrade.
  INDISTINCT RADIO CHATTER  No-one knows for sure how the subs will cope  with this extreme environment.
  OK.
 Right, I'm going to soak it up.
 OK.
  Just half an hour into the very first dive,  a puddle is forming on the floor of the sub.
  Orla confirms it's seawater.
  Yeah, Roger.
 I'm just try to soak up this puddle of water,  and then see if any more comes.
  They must find the leak and repair it fast.
  Are you going to knock that over my? Yeah.
  You're at 450 metres in a small bubble and water's coming in.
  That's a half an hour straight shot back up to the surface.
  You're kind of thinking about,  "Are we going to fill up with water? And if we are, there's no way out!"  Yeah.
  The sub pilots are well drilled for emergencies.
  INDISTINCT RADIO CHATTER  Just pass them over.
 Yeah.
  Ralph quickly finds the flood and fixes it.
  He made it all seem absolutely ordinary and normal and,  "I've got this covered, don't you worry,"  and within 20 minutes, he did.
  The waters of the Antarctic Sound are potentially rich  but also treacherous.
  The Sound is ominously known as "Iceberg Alley".
  We've got to find a place where we can get the submarines down and up  safely without any icebergs coming along and bowling them over.
  I've got a feeling it's going to be a bit like a game of Space Invaders.
  A metre cube of ice weighs a tonne.
  You start sort of grinding that around the sphere, it's delicate.
  It's like a big Faberge egg.
  One dive brings them right up to the underside face of an iceberg.
  There are icebergs up there that are the size of a small car, and  then there are icebergs up there that are the size of Hyde Park.
  Enormous.
  Conditions here can change in an instant.
  The captain radios down to the subs.
  Yeah, Roger that.
  We've currently got a couple of big icebergs coming down  the channel, and it looks like they're on a collision course.
  The impact of two icebergs colliding overhead is clearly heard.
  INTENSE RUMBLE  That is ice.
  With icebergs colliding above and the weather turning fast,  the subs are quickly recalled.
  Once again their efforts are thwarted.
  Finally, after two weeks, conditions are just right.
  Once again the team attempt their 1,000-metre dive in Iceberg Alley.
  An hour after leaving the surface they close in on their goal.
   Control, control.
  This is Nadir  on bottom, depth - one-zero-zero-zero metres.
  Roger.
 Depth - 1,000 metres.
  Control out.
 New record!  First manned sub dive to 1,000 metres in Antarctica!  At the bottom of the ocean, at the end of the world,  the amount of life they find is astonishing.
  But they are equally astonished to find that,  two thirds of a mile from the surface,  icebergs are still a danger.
  Rocks can drop from them as they melt,  and one lands right in front of the sub.
  I don't think many people who are diving subs  ever consider big lumps of rock landing on them.
  It's, it's not your normal risk.
  If it had hit the sphere,  there's a good chance it would have put a nice scratch down it.
  If something of ten, 15, 20 tonnes had hit the sub,  it would completely destroy it.
  But over the following dives  the team learns it's these very drop stones  that enrich the Antarctic deep sea bed,  creating firm anchor points for life to thrive.
  Proof that the only way to fully appreciate the complexity and  abundance of life in the deep is to go there ourselves.
  Next time, we travel to bustling coral reefs.
  Here, animals must go to extraordinary lengths  to get ahead of the competition in these crowded cities.
  To find out more about our oceans with this free poster, call  Or go to  .
.
and follow the links to the Open University.
 
                    In a far corner of South-East Asia,  lies the Coral Triangle.
  A cluster of the richest coral reefs, in the world.
  Undersea cities crammed full of life.
  As in any crowded metropolis,  there is fierce rivalry for space,  for food  and for a partner.
  But the reef is also a place full of opportunity.
  A cuttlefish.
  It specialises in hunting crabs.
  But a large crab is a dangerous quarry.
  It has powerful claws.
  The cuttlefish, however, has a remarkable talent.
  Its skin contains millions of pigment cells  with which it can create ever-changing colours  and patterns.
  And that apparently hypnotises the crab.
  A cuttlefish may be clever,  but a shark is bigger.
  And it eats cuttlefish.
  Time to disappear.
  Back to the hunt.
  A new target, but the same mesmerising technique.
  For those that manage to establish themselves in these bustling  undersea cities,  there can be great rewards.
  Corals build themselves homes of limestone,  in the warm, clear, shallow seas of the Tropics.
  Their reefs occupy less than one tenth  of one percent of the ocean floor.
  Yet, they're home to a quarter  of all known marine species.
  They are complex,  infinitely variant structures,  providing all kinds of homes for their many residents,  from penthouse suites,  to backstreet dens.
  Here, on Australia's Great Barrier Reef,  a coral grouper lives by hunting for small fish.
  But how do you get a meal here,  when you're too big to squeeze into crevices?  And the grouper also has a rival,  one which is highly intelligent,  and seeks the same kind of prey.
  An octopus.
  It can reach into really narrow cracks.
  Even so,  its prey often escapes.
  What if they could work together?  The grouper turns pale,  and tries to attract the octopus's attention.
  It performs a head stand.
  Not only is the grouper signalling to the octopus,  it's indicating where the prey is hiding.
  The octopus reaches inside.
  The fish take fright.
  And swim straight into the grouper's jaws.
  Sometimes, the octopus gets the reward,  sometimes, the grouper does.
  Two very different species  have discovered that teamwork can bring success,  in reef city.
  Teamwork, in fact, is the very foundation of life  on the reef.
  The corals themselves also rely on a partnership.
  But one of a much more intimate kind.
  Corals are colonies of anemone-like animals,  polyps.
  Some as small as grains of sand.
  Living inside the tissues of each polyp,  are minute plant-like cells, invisible to the naked eye.
  By day flourishing in tropical sunshine,  the plant-like cells provide the polyps  with up to 90% of their food.
  And when it's dark, the polyps continue to feed  by using their tentacles to grab edible particles drifting by.
  The polyps also extract calcium carbonate from the sea water,  and use it to build a stony housing for themselves.
  Coral colonies can continue to grow for centuries.
  Possibly millennia.
  And they can build structures that can reach the size of a house.
  The biggest of their cities, is the Great Barrier Reef.
  It runs for over 1400 miles along the coast of North East Australia.
  Activity in coral reefs, wherever they are, never ceases.
  At dawn, the day shift begins.
  Accompanied by a chorus of submarine song,  created by fish, shrimps, and other inhabitants of the reef.
  Every resident in this city, has its role.
  Scavengers, like the sea cucumber,  recycle the waste of others.
  These parrot fish, bite off chunks of coral  and crunch it to extract the contents.
  And then, excrete the rest as sand.
  Green turtles, here in Borneo,  pay regular visits to a particular patch of coral.
  This little female is up early and one step ahead of the others.
  Turtles travel long distances along the reef in order to get here.
  This is their destination.
  Turtle Rock.
  Generations of visiting turtles have worn a hollow in its top.
  This is home to blennies  and surgeon fish.
  They clean the visitors picking off any algae, parasites and dead skin,  that they can find.
  Other client are close behind.
  A queue is forming.
  The big males barge their way in.
  And the smaller female is forced out.
  She takes a quick turn around the block,  while the others are squabbling.
  And then, she sneaks back in.
  So the cleaners get a nutritious meal,  and their customers are freed of their parasites and other encumbrances.
  And it's now thought, that a spot of pampering at a cleaning station  may even reduce stress.
  The lands of the Middle East are so hot and dry,  that much of their surface is almost lifeless.
  But here in the Red Sea,  Coral Reefs flourish wonderfully.
  The waters offshore,  are almost as rich in life as a rainforest.
  And some animals come to the reefs  simply for rest and relaxation.
  The family of bottlenose dolphins  are resting on the reef  after a night's feeding offshore.
  Whilst the adult and their babies sleep,  the adolescents set off to explore  and they appear to make up games.
  You might call this one, "Catch the coral.
"  The rules aren't entirely clear.
  They pick up different bits of broken coral,  and drop them.
  Some fall fast.
  Others sink more slowly.
  And some seem to be descending in a way  that pleases everybody.
  Only the most successful city residents can afford the luxury of playing games.
  But, such games do that their value.
  They may help the youngsters develop the coordination and the agility  that they will need when they start hunting in the open sea.
  Every reef has a sharply defined boundary.
  Its city walls.
  On the outer side is the drop off.
  These ramparts protect the city from the ocean waves.
  But twice a day, the walls are covered by the incoming tide.
  In the Bahamas, the rush of the water creates a truly strange phenomenon.
  Seamen once told tales of a giant sea monster,  lurking here deep inside the reef,  that would drag sailors to their doom.
  Today, we know it is in fact a whirlpool created by the incoming tide  rushing over deep coral caves.
  These currents bring in fresh supplies of microscopic food to the reef  from the open ocean.
  And in the Maldives, on the biggest tides,  one particular coral lagoon  become so flooded with plankton,  that it attracts hundreds of ocean giants.
  Manta Rays.
  With three meter wing spans.
  With their huge sloth like mouths wide open  they filter out the plankton.
  And the mantas create a vortex of their own  that further concentrates their food.
  This behaviour has been called the manta cyclone.
  Then the tide changes,  and the supply of food is cut of.
  The mantas leave the lagoon.
  Life on the sheltered side of the reef is tranquil and peaceful.
  In these suburbs, any creature wishing to escape  from the bustling crowds of reef city,  can find plenty of space.
  On the other hand,  there is nowhere to hide.
  That, at night,  makes it a dangerous place.
  Nocturnal predators, such as this lion fish,  patrol the reef edge.
  The hunter has become the hunted.
  A bobbit,  a giant carnivorous worm  with jaws as sharp as daggers.
  It has an ancestry that stretches back more than four hundred million years.
  It's a meter long.
  It tastes for scent.
  And feels for movement.
  Dawn, and with light, the reef becomes a safer place.
  Little bream return to foraging.
  The bobbit might still be hungry.
  But now in daylight the odds have shifted.
  The bream can see the bobbit.
  Instead of retreating,  they join together to blow away the sand covering the worm.
  So, taking away its advantage of surprise.
  By revealing the bobbit's hiding place,  they will all be able to feed more safely.
  But it pays to remember  there is a bobbit about.
  Out here, on the sand flats,  there is safe accommodation for some.
  The family of saddleback clownfish have found an excellent home.
  The tentacles of this carpet anemone can kill.
  But the clownfish are immune to the poison,  so they can shelter from danger.
  In return, the fish keep the anemone clean of debris.
  As with all clownfish,  the family is ruled by a big female.
  Her white face marks her out as the boss.
  The diminutive male has to prove his worth,  so he works tirelessly,  removing debris and generally keeping on top of the housework.
  His greatest challenge is to find a safe place  where the boss can lay her eggs.
  But there's nothing solid here for the female to lay them on.
  A nearby shell could be the solution.
  If only he can move it to the protection of the anemone.
  Too heavy.
  Besides, it has a mind of its own.
  The hermit crab.
  But out here, twice a day,  the anemone is swept by tidal currents,  and they bring in new opportunities.
  An old plastic bottle.
  Perhaps, this will do.
  Not heavy enough.
  A coconut shell.
  It looks just right.
  But it's a long way from home.
  And he can't move it by himself.
  So the pair now work together.
  A little adjustment to the anemone's tentacles,  in order to clear a space for it.
  And the shell is tucked in.
  The female lays.
  A safe nursery at last.
  He has proved himself worthy to father her young.
  And he fertilizes them.
  Now he will meticulously tend the eggs,  keeping them clean and healthy until they hatch  in 10 days time.
  Reef creatures go to great lengths to give their young a head start in life.
  And nowhere more so  than on the remotest reefs in the world.
  French Polynesia,  the very heart of the South Pacific.
  Protected by their isolation,  some of the reefs here, are still virtually pristine.
  This marbled grouper has made it in the city and reached adulthood.
  Now, it's the time to mate.
  To find a partner, he must head to the most dangerous part of this reef:  The drop off.
  Patrolled by grey reef sharks,  hundreds of them.
  They seem to be resting,  for now.
  Thousands of other groupers have gathered on the seabed below.
  The females are almost bursting with eggs.
  But to mate with one,  he must first get through the crowd of other waiting males.
  And they all have the same thing on their minds.
  They jostle to get as close as possible to a female.
  This male may have secured pole position,  but the female won't release her eggs for him to fertilize,  until conditions are just right.
  Now the sharks begin to close in,  sensing that the critical moment is approaching.
  The tide is beginning to turn.
  This could be the moment to spawn.
  Suddenly, the females rush up towards the surface  releasing their clouds of eggs as they go.
  The males pursue them, simultaneously releasing their sperm.
  It's an act the groupers seem prepared to die for.
  It's now or never.
  The fertilized eggs,  will now be swept away  from the many hungry mouths of the reef dwellers.
  Most of the billions of eggs that cloud the sea,  will be eaten.
  But a few,  a tiny but crucial minority,  will find another reef  and make it their home.
  But today's coral reefs are facing a new threat.
  The seas are warming.
  A rise in temperature of just one for two degrees  for just a few weeks,  can be enough to cause the coral polyps to eject their plant-like cells.
  When that happens, the corals lose both their colour,  and their main source of food.
  If the high temperatures are sustained,  coral, bleached in this way,  is likely to die.
  In recent years, it's thought that half the world's coral reefs,  have been affected by bleaching.
  Including, since 2016,  around two thirds of the shallow water corals,  on Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
  These once crowded submarine cities,  are reduced  to bleak ruins.
  And many of their inhabitants, left homeless.
  Some scientists predict that by the end of the century,  coral reef cities as we know them,  could be a thing of the past.
  Is there any future for these most precious of ocean treasures?  Well, that ultimately depends on how fast they heat up,  and how warm the seas become.
  And there is a glimmer of hope,  because of the way the corals reproduce themselves.
  On one special night of the year,  the full moon triggers an extraordinary event:  The spawning of the coral.
  With extraordinary synchrony, entire reefs reproduce.
  Billions of fertilized eggs drift away  carried by the ocean currents.
  And it's not just the corals that spawn,  so do many other residents of the reef.
  A whole range of young  are swept through the oceans,  ready to settle on a vacant site,  and bring back into existence the complex community,  that is a coral reef.
  We may not know what the future hold for our seas,  but coral reefs can regenerate.
  As long as some reefs survive,  some hope can remain.
  French Polynesia.
  Over 4,000 miles from the nearest major land mass.
  Protected from fishing pressures,  it's home to perhaps the last great gathering of marbled groupers.
  We're finally here.
  It's taken quite a few days.
  We can't actually say where "here" is,  because uh, we've been asked not to mention the exact spot,  because it's a protected area.
  The team face a huge filming challenge  as the groupers normally spawn just once a year,  and it lasts less than an hour.
  The team's advisor is biologist, Yvonne Sadovy who's been  studying fish spawning aggregations for over 30 years.
  Here, it is close to the situation it has been  for thousands of years.
  It's pretty much the only place on the planet that I'm aware of  where these groupers come together in the numbers that we see here.
  I really hope that they're there  because if they're not, then we've come all this way for nothing.
  - We've got our timing right, haven't we Denis? - Yes.
  - Confident? - Yeah.
  They're not disappointed.
  Denis has filmed groupers gathering here for 15 years  and has got to know their behaviour.
  The grouper aren't the only ones to be gathering.
  It's the highest density of grey reef sharks  anywhere on the planet.
  This is what a pristine reef should look like.
  Lots and lots of predators.
  With the groupers here, now the challenge is predicting  exactly when they'll spawn.
  To judge if they're close, Yvonne reviews the day's footage.
  From what we've seen here, the male's courting the female.
  When you can slow these things down,  this is when you begin to see some of this detail.
  If you were a betting woman would you bet on tomorrow?  I would say tomorrow or the next day.
  I mean I think they're pretty close.
  With only six divers, the team can't stay underwater all the time.
  So, based on experience,  they decide to dive on the full moon's changing tides,  thought to help coordinate grouper spawning.
  But this year, the strongest tidal change is at night.
  We're just kitting up for the first night dive.
  During the day, we've been seeing sharks around this area, but we don't know  how they're going to react at night.
  Are you nervous?  Reef sharks hunt at night,  so the divers wear chain-mail suits and helmets as a precaution.
  One, two, three, four.
  Divers comms check, comms check.
  Receiving you loud and clear.
  No sign of groupers spawning, but in the dark,  the shark's attitude has changed.
  They're hunting.
  Using electro-reception to hunt,  sharks are tuned to even the smallest electro stimulus including the cameras.
  With the current building,  now is the worst possible time to lose contact with the surface.
  We're in the middle of nowhere.
 We have no idea what's going on  down there.
 All we can hear is broken communication.
  With no sign of spawning, they end the dive.
  Phew!  The team decide to save their energy  for the next change of the tide.
  At dawn, they prepare for what they hope will be  the spawning event they've all been waiting for.
  Bad news, we still are  But after just 20 minutes, the divers are back on the surface  with some devastating news for their crew.
  We missed it.
  Maybe they spawned last night.
  I don't Oh, God, I don't know.
  The team were too late.
  So my guess would be that we've missed spawning by a few hours.
  And possibly, it's that they just reached some  kind of critical mass or critical density  and spawned a little bit early.
  The following year, Yvonne returns to French Polynesia,  hoping to learn more about the grouper.
  This year, Laurent Ballesta and his experienced crew,  take on the challenge.
  With many more divers, they have a new approach  and they plan to have Laurent on watch in the water constantly.
  And this year, after hundreds of hours of continual monitoring,  they have captured the defining moment of this astonishing event -  the mass spawning of the grouper.
  We have the privilege to be able to watch this process  actually occurring.
 Uh, and that's a real thrill.
  They're really important for the biology of the animals.
  Thanks to a combined team effort from both crews  and Yvonne's research over many years,  we could at last, tell the marbled groupers' incredible story.
  Next time, we head into the vastness of the open ocean.
  To survive in this blue wilderness, some are fast,  others use deadly strategies,  and a few rely on the closeness of their families.
 
                    The world's greatest wilderness, the open ocean.
  It covers over half the surface of our planet.
  Here, there is nowhere to hide and little to eat.
  It's the marine equivalent of a desert.
  And patrolling this desert, spinner dolphins.
  They stick together  in a super-pod, 5,000 strong.
  That maximises their chances of finding something to eat.
  Like all who live here, they must go to extraordinary lengths  to make their home in the big blue.
  There are rare moments when these empty seas can explode with life.
  Lanternfish, off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica.
  They're scarcely bigger than minnows,  but what they lack in size they make up for in numbers.
  They are one of the most numerous fish anywhere.
  Normally, they only come to the surface at night,  to feed on plankton,  but this immense shoal has risen during the day,  almost certainly in order to spawn.
  For the dolphins, this would be a bonanza.
  They have located the shoal using their echo-sounding calls.
  But they have to get to it quickly.
  They are not the only hunters here.
  Yellowfin tuna have also detected the shoal.
  And behind them, with their two-metre wingspans, mobula rays.
  Now sailfish, one of the fastest fish in the sea,  have joined the chase.
  The lanternfish may return to the deep at any moment.
  But now the dolphins have got here.
  They swim beneath the shoal, pinning it to the surface  and forcing the lanternfish to pack more closely together.
  And now the sea begins to boil.
  The tuna charge into the shoal at over 40mph.
  The slower-swimming rays arrive at last.
  With their immense mouths agape,  they scoop up the lanternfish by the hundred.
  The shoal has now been largely dispersed,  and the sailfish pick off the survivors.
  In just 15 minutes,  all that's left is a silvery confetti of scales.
  But here, such feasts are only too infrequent.
  Whilst the dolphins perform great feats of endurance,  others are driven to even greater extremes  to find food in this ocean desert.
  A sleeping giant.
  A sperm whale.
  This family is resting between bouts of feeding.
  Who knows what the owners  of the biggest brain in the planet dream about.
  One has a calf.
  It's about two weeks old but still dependent on its mother's milk.
  It's hungry.
  It communicates with its mother using a pattern of clicks.
  But its mother slumbers on.
  The calf, covered in sucker fish, of which it can't yet rid itself,  has to be patient.
  Sleep over and refreshed, the whales move on.
  Sperm whales don't wait for their prey to rise to the surface.
  They swim down into the depths to find it.
  They take a series of heavy breaths  to saturate their blood with oxygen.
  Then down they go.
  This entire family dives together in search of squid.
  A mother will push her body to the limits of her endurance,  and already it's hard for her calf to keep up with her.
  The calf sticks to its mother as closely as it can  touching her frequently, as if for reassurance.
  But 300 metres down,  it seems the calf can't hold its breath any longer.
  In their early years, calves are forced to sit out the hunt.
  The adults continue their dive.
  The mother changes her calls  into a series of louder and more rapid clicks.
  She's now using sonar to hunt down shoals of squid.
  At 800 metres, a burst of clicks.
  Then silence.
  She's made a catch.
  A calf can have a long wait at the surface.
  A mother returns from the deep after as much as an hour.
  She has a stomach full of squid.
  Finally, this hungry calf can take some milk.
  It's one of the richest produced by any mammal,  and the calf guzzles a bathful of it a day.
  It may be six years before a calf masters the art of deep diving  and is able to find food for itself.
  The emptiness of the big blue is what makes life so hard for hunters.
  But it's this emptiness that makes it comparatively safe for prey.
  A baby turtle, hatched just days ago, is leaving the crowded,  dangerous waters of the coast and heading for the open ocean.
  To start with, they fill their little stomachs with plankton.
  But soon they need something more substantial.
  Only recently have we begun to solve  the mystery of where baby turtles disappear to in their early years.
  Hundreds of miles offshore, in every ocean,  there are communities of young castaways.
  So anything that floats attracts them.
  A log.
  It may have been at sea for several years,  and it has already become the centre of a small community.
  Young puffer fish are here for the same reason.
  A floating log is just the kind of refuge  this young turtle has been looking for.
  Here, there's not only seaweed on which to graze, but barnacles.
  But it's important to stay under cover.
  A young ocean-going silky shark is here, too.
  It's learning what tastes good.
  And what doesn't.
  We now know that many young turtles stay in such places  for several years, until adulthood.
  Even if it means facing the full force of the high seas.
  The sun beating down on the deep blue  warms the surface waters so that they evaporate.
  As the vapour rises, it condenses into clouds.
  They rapidly build into gigantic, burgeoning towers,  which eventually generate violent storms, some 1,000 miles across.
  Hurricane-force winds sweep across the open ocean,  building waves that can rise to 30 metres tall.
  Out here, ships have been known to sink without trace.
  130 million containers are shipped across the oceans every year.
  And on average, four of them fall into the sea every day.
  In 1992, a few were lost  that contained a consignment of bath toys  including 7,000 plastic ducks like these.
  They started their travels 1,000 miles off Alaska.
  Some drifted right across the Pacific Ocean and reached Australia.
  Others were carried north  and landed on shores between Russia and Alaska.
  They even found their way into the High Arctic.
  One duck, having been at sea for 15 years  and crossing three oceans,  eventually landed on the west coast of Scotland.
  Their travels vividly illustrate how a network of currents  connects all our oceans into one gigantic circulatory system.
  Many of the inhabitants of the big blue rely on these currents  to carry them to feeding grounds.
  The blue shark.
  It travels over 5,000 miles a year,  riding on the currents, supported by its broad wing-shaped fins.
  This one may not have eaten for two months.
  But the currents can carry promising traces of fatty oils  from many miles away and will lead it to its next meal.
  After days of travel, the smell of food gets stronger.
  A dead whale, recently struck by a ship.
  This could be a real feast,  but the blue shark must be cautious.
  Great white sharks  ten times heavier than a blue  are highly possessive around a whale carcass.
  Great whites are eager to feed on energy-rich whale blubber,  which we now know forms a major part of their diet.
  Once the great white has had its fill,  smaller sharks, like the blue shark, tackle what's left of the carcass.
  As the oils from this dead whale spread more widely,  more and more blue sharks appear.
  Within days, the carcass will be stripped of its blubber.
  Then, no longer kept buoyant by its oil,  it will sink into the depths below.
  The blue, with its reserves of fat replenished,  can now survive for another two months without eating.
  Over half of all animals in the open ocean drift in currents.
  Jellyfish cross entire oceans  feeding on whatever happens to tangle with their tentacles.
  Some can grow to a metre, even two metres, across.
  And when, by lucky chance,  they encounter a patch of sea rich in plankton,  their numbers explode.
  It's such a successful strategy  that jellies are one of the most common life forms on the planet.
  But among the jellies, and looking somewhat like them,  is a rather more complex and sinister creature.
  The Portuguese man-o'-war.
  It floats with the help of a gas-filled bladder,  topped by a vertical membrane.
  With that serving as a sail,  it maintains a steady course through the waves.
  Long threads trail behind it, some as much as 30 metres long.
  Each is armed with many thousands of stinging cells.
  A single tentacle could kill a fish or, in rare cases, a human.
  But among its lethal tentacles lurks  a man-o'-war fish that feeds by nibbling them.
  Whilst this fish has some resistance to the stings,  it must still be extremely careful.
  Most other fish are not so lucky.
  A tentacle has caught this one and reels it in.
  It's already paralysed.
  Specialised muscular tentacles transfer the victim to others  that digest the catch, liquefying it with powerful chemicals.
  Eventually, all that is left  is a scaly husk.
  This voracious man-o'-war may collect over 100 small fish in a day.
  For the most part, the big blue seems featureless  a place where the winds blow, uninterrupted by land.
  But beneath the surface there are long mountain ranges,  deep trenches and isolated volcanic peaks  that make it far more varied than the human eye can see.
  We are only just discovering in any detail  how the inhabitants of the big blue exploit that.
  A lonely whale shark on a special journey.
  She is as long as a small aircraft and she weighs over 20 tonnes.
  Like many sharks, she does not lay eggs but gives birth to live young.
  She carries up to 300 of them in her swollen belly.
  She may be the biggest fish in the sea,  but the place where whale sharks give birth has not yet been found.
  Today, however, we may be a step closer to solving this mystery.
  We have known that great numbers of whale sharks,  at certain times of the year, appear around the Galapagos Islands.
  Here they assemble around a tiny islet  that rises abruptly from particularly deep water.
  It's known as Darwin Island.
  Here, swirling currents bring up nutrients from the deep,  so enriching these waters that they attract  great concentrations of fish from far and wide.
  Thousands of hammerhead sharks also assemble here.
  They are nearly all female.
  They, too, it seems, have come here to breed.
  The whale shark receives an extraordinary welcome.
  Silky sharks, themselves three metres long,  bounce against her rough skin  perhaps to scrape off any parasites they might have.
  These sharks could be a danger to any newly born young.
  So, perhaps to avoid them,  the whale shark dives  down to around 600 metres.
  And there she may release her young.
  In these great depths,  away from the predators that hunt in the waters above,  and with abundant food,  her babies could grow and eventually disperse.
  No-one, it is true,  has ever seen young ones in these little-visited depths.
  But the fact that hundreds of expectant whale sharks  come here every year  is strong evidence that somewhere here  lies the nursery of the biggest fish in the sea.
  There are almost 30,000 sizeable islands  scattered across the world's oceans.
  One of them is South Georgia  an ideal place for those ocean dwellers  who are compelled to land in order to breed.
  The wandering albatross.
  It may spend as much as a year continuously at sea.
  Searching for food,  gliding on wings that are 3.
5 metres across -  the biggest of any living bird.
  The entire world population of 16,000 wanderers  nest on South Georgia  and half a dozen or so of the other smaller islands  that lie in the Southern Ocean.
  It's spring and this bird is returning  to the nest site it's always used.
  Its lifelong partner is already here.
  In South Georgia,  individual birds have been studied for their entire lives,  revealing that older pairs, in their late 30s,  will go to extraordinary lengths to give their young  the best possible start in life.
  This chick is now several weeks old,  but still has its warm, downy coat.
  The chick will need a regular supply of regurgitated fish and squid.
  With food so scarce in the open ocean,  both parents may have to scour thousands of square miles  just to provide enough for one meal.
  Ageing parents struggle on all through the Antarctic winter  to raise a chick that is big, strong and healthy.
  After some 130 days,  the youngster begins to replace its down with flight feathers.
  Finally, nine months after their egg was laid,  this chick is ready to leave.
  Of all the chicks they've reared in recent years,  such a favoured chick will have the best chance of survival.
  But it will also be their last.
  Elderly parents never recover from their exertions.
  They will soon leave this island, never to be seen again.
  Surviving in the open ocean  has always tested animals to the limit  but today they face a new additional threat.
  Plastic.
  Just over 100 years ago,  we invented a wonderful new material  that could be moulded into all kinds of shapes  and we took great trouble to ensure that it was hard-wearing,  rot-proof and virtually indestructible.
  Now, every year,  we dump around eight million tonnes of it into the sea.
  Here, it entangles and drowns vast numbers of marine creatures.
  But it may have even more widespread and far-reaching consequences.
  A pod of short-finned pilot whales.
  They live together in what are, perhaps,  the most closely knit of families in the whole ocean.
  Today, in the Atlantic waters off Europe, as elsewhere,  they have to share the ocean with plastic.
  A mother is holding her newborn young.
  It's dead.
  She is reluctant to let it go  and has been carrying it around for many days.
  In top predators like these,  industrial chemicals can build up to lethal levels  and plastic could be part of the problem.
  As plastic breaks down,  it combines with these other pollutants  that are consumed by vast numbers of marine creatures.
  It's possible her calf may have been poisoned  by her own contaminated milk.
  Pilot whales have big brains.
  They can certainly experience emotions.
  Judging from the behaviour of the adults,  the loss of the infant has affected the entire family.
  Unless the flow of plastics and industrial pollution  into the world's oceans is reduced,  marine life will be poisoned by them for many centuries to come.
  The creatures that live in the big blue are perhaps more remote  than any animals on the planet.
  But not remote enough, it seems,  to escape the effects of what we are doing to their world.
  The biggest challenge of filming in the vastness of the open ocean  is to find your subject  and the Blue Planet team wanted to film  one of the most elusive of them all,  the rarely witnessed "boiling sea".
  Until now, this feeding frenzy has been the stuff of legends.
  After some promising sightings off the north-east coast of Australia,  the team heads out to investigate.
  We know it's a phenomenon, we know it's out there,  the scientists have documented it,  the fishermen have told us about it,  so we know it's happening, but no-one has been crazy enough  to attempt to go out there and actually film it - except for us.
  The team start their search 100 miles out in the Pacific Ocean.
  The reason it's called a "boiling sea" is that the tuna  are actually coming out of the water  and attacking lanternfish and it creates a lot of white water.
  To film the boiling seas,  the team must first find a large shoal of bait fish,  most likely to be lanternfish  rising to the surface at night to spawn.
  A few days out,  Adrian thinks he may have spotted a giant shoal on the echo-sounder.
  What we're seeing is a very, very dense layer  at about 200 metres' water depth.
  And so, the fact that we've got this would suggest  that we have a very deep and dense layer of fish.
  One of the best ways to film at such depths in the open ocean  is to use an ROV - a remotely operated vehicle -  carrying a light-sensitive camera.
  But working with such heavy equipment in the high seas  is a risky operation.
  Fortunately, a team of technicians is on hand,  and 24 hours later, they're ready to relaunch.
  Adrian drops them on top  of what he hopes is a large shoal of lanternfish.
  Good news is, we've just put the ROV down,  we're down at 250 metres,  which means we've gone to almost the end of the cable  and nothing's blown up so we're back in business.
  But there's almost nothing there,  just a thick layer of plankton.
  Over the next three weeks,  they don't find a single lanternfish.
  This trip is the perfect illustration  of why we know so little about the ocean -  we came out looking for something,  we've searched and searched and searched,  and we still haven't found it  even with every single tool you could wish for.
  As it turned out, the team had been filming  at the very start of El Nino -  an unpredictable climatic event  when sea temperatures can suddenly rise  and disrupt the spawning behaviour of fish.
  It would be 18 months before conditions would improve  and the team could continue their quest.
  The other side of the Pacific Ocean, off Costa Rica.
  This time, rather than searching for their prey,  the team are looking for their predators.
  But in the endless blue,  even finding a massive pod of dolphins isn't easy.
  20 miles offshore, series producer Mark Brownlow  leads an aerial filming team  scanning thousands of square miles of ocean  but there's not a dolphin in sight.
  Day three, no spinner dolphins.
  Getting worried now  Finally, after ten days on the open ocean,  they get their reward.
  OK, dolphins!  Woohoo!  Yes!  Spinners!  With dolphins in sight, the dive team race to intercept them.
  Spinners, look!  The plan is to film the dolphins' feeding frenzy from underwater.
  Several hundred dolphins jumping all over the place,  it looks like this could be it.
  They catch up with the dolphins.
  But they're too late.
  Ah, dear.
  Nothing, Rog? Just nothing.
  Just fish scales and bones,  it's like turning up at a battle  just to see all the dead bodies left over.
  To stand a chance of filming the dolphins' feeding,  the dive team need to be more proactive.
  Rachel hitches a ride, following them underwater,  searching for any clue to where they might go next.
  Finally, after three weeks of searching,  the dive team catch a huge feeding event,  a massive shoal of lanternfish  being rounded up by hundreds of spinner dolphins.
  That was incredibly intense.
  A very large bait ball  spread over probably the size of a football field.
  Things coming in and over your shoulder, over your head,  it was incredible.
  For the first time,  the aerial team can record the epic scale of this spectacle.
  You know, we heard these stories of boiling seas, but it's real!  They're huge.
  The vastness of the ocean wilderness  made capturing this extraordinary event a great challenge.
  But this is the reward,  a moment of unparalleled drama  in the immense expanse of the big blue.
  Next time, we journey into the bountiful green sea.
  These are enchanted worlds, home to strange creatures  where only the most ingenious will triumph.
 
                    In the far north,  after three dark months of winter  a world is waiting  for a trigger.
  The sunshine of spring.
  Starfish are the first to respond.
  They race for the highest point  and sensing changes in the water,  with the tips of their tube feet  they spawn.
  Sea cucumbers,  with only their mouths exposed,  now emerge.
  They collect as many starfish eggs as they can.
  Which is quite a lot, when you've got ten arms.
  Now sea pens rise up to claim a share.
  The creatures here must grab what they can of this annual banquet.
  For the light has also set in motion the greatest transformation of all.
  Fronds of kelp, a marine alga,  rise towards the surface,  lifted by their gas-filled bladders.
  Soon, a marine forest has materialised  teeming with life of all kinds.
  These green seas are some of the most productive,  but fiercely competitive, waters  in all the oceans.
  The southern tip of Africa.
  Here, two great oceans collide.
  In the shallows, fed by rich currents,  are bountiful forests of kelp.
  Barely visible except for the pulsating siphon  through which it breathes, a common octopus,  waiting for prey to pass by.
  A crab will do.
  The octopus sets off in pursuit.
  And then lurks  with the patience of an ambush hunter.
  But the octopus shares the Cape waters  with a great concentration of other predators.
  Fur seals  and sharks.
  They all eat octopus  if they can find one.
  And pyjama sharks are experts  at hunting in the undergrowth.
  Time to disappear.
  But these tough-skinned little sharks  are small enough to reach deep into crevices.
  But the octopus is far from finished.
  She slips her tentacles into the shark's gills.
  That prevents the shark from breathing.
  So, the shark has to let go.
  When caught out in the open, and vulnerable,  this octopus does something truly extraordinary  and never recorded before.
  She disguises herself  with a protective armour of shells.
  She's hiding in plain sight.
  The shark can sense its prey  but the shells confuse it.
  In a forest full of hungry mouths,  superior wits allow this octopus to stay alive.
  Forests of kelp flourish in seasonal waters around the globe  particularly along the Pacific Coast of North America.
  Here, the biggest kelps of all  grow in vast forests,  stretching for hundreds of miles.
  In some places, the giant fronds  rise up to 60 metres tall.
  The thickets they create are crowded with life.
  Competition here, for space and food, is intense.
  A challenging problem for the Garibaldi fish.
  He tends to his patch of seaweed,  filled with tiny creatures that he eats.
  As with most farmers, his work never ends.
  He removes snails and any other grazers  that come to eat his algae  no matter how big they are.
  He has to deal with pests of all kinds.
  This can be the worst of them -  sea urchins that can scrape off every vestige of algae from a rock.
  Its spines are needle-sharp.
  Somehow, the Garibaldi must remove it.
  But the problem with sea urchins  is that they just keep coming.
  When evening arrives and the light fades, he has to stop.
  He not only needs a rest, he needs to hide.
  Because at night, predators prowl through these forests.
  A torpedo ray,  capable of stunning its victim with 45 volts of electricity.
  While the Garibaldi hides  the urchins can feed without interruption.
  The light returns  and he finds his farm is once again under attack.
  Urchins, like locusts,  have the ability to swarm.
  And this can be disastrous, not just for the Garibaldi,  but for the kelp forest itself.
  All the vegetation is now under attack.
  The urchins move through the forest,  cutting through the kelp fronds  and leaving behind vast barrens.
  These urchin armies have felled many kelp forests  along the Pacific Coast of North America.
  But help is at hand.
  Sea otters.
  All other kinds of otters spend much of their lives on land,  but sea otters rarely leave the water.
  At first, a newly-born pup is not a very good swimmer,  so its mother spends hours grooming its fur to make it buoyant.
  But to provide her youngster with milk and keep herself warm,  she must eat up to 30% of her body weight every day.
  She does that by eating shellfish.
  And urchins are among a sea otter's favourite delicacies.
  In the past, sea otters were hunted so intensively for their fur  that they came close to extinction.
  With them gone, many kelp forests were replaced with urchin barrens.
  Today, sea otters are protected  and as their numbers slowly return,  many of the kelp forests are recovering, too.
  Now, in some remote places,  sea otters are so numerous  they assemble in huge rafts  something that hasn't been seen for over a century.
  In the sun-drenched shallows off Australia  kelp is replaced by the sea's only flowering plants,  sea grass.
  The most extensive of these marine grasslands  can stretch for over 3,000 square miles.
  All across the tropics, they're patrolled by tiger sharks.
  They can grow up to five metres in length  and have powerful crushing jaws.
  Green turtles are their prey.
  The turtles feed almost entirely on sea grass.
  A single one can consume up to two kilos of it in a day.
  But they can never rest easy.
  Healthy turtles will keep well away from an approaching shark.
  And just by keeping the turtles on the move,  the sharks prevent any one patch of sea grass from being overgrazed.
  And that has benefits for us all.
  A patch of sea grass can absorb and store  35 times as much carbon dioxide  as the same area of a rainforest.
  So, the prairies and their sharks are surprising allies  in the fight against a warming climate.
  The struggle to survive in our green seas  can have far-reaching consequences.
  Once a year, one particular meadow in Australia is transformed.
  Around the first full moon of winter,  an army materialises.
  Spider crabs.
  For the past year, they've been feeding in deeper waters.
  Now they march across the sea-grass plains.
  Hundreds of thousands of them.
  They clamber over one another  creating great mounds  nearly 100 metres long  They're not seeking mates, neither are they laying eggs.
  They have come here in order  to grow.
  Like all crabs,  their bodies are enclosed  in a hard, un-expandable shell.
  So, to grow, they have to break out of it  and that allows the soft one that has developed beneath to expand.
  It will take days for the new shell to harden.
  Its legs are so limp that they won't work properly.
  The crab is unprotected and in great danger.
  A smooth stingray.
  It's huge - about four metres long.
  It wants a soft, freshly-moulted crab  that will be easier to eat.
  The crabs try to stick together.
  But now, disturbed by the ray,  they're scattering.
  A newly-moulted crab  is too weak to keep up with the crowd.
  The safest place is right in the middle of the pile.
  That is why they have all assembled here.
  There is safety in numbers.
  The vast majority of the crabs escape  and within the next few days,  they will be ready to return to the depths  and resume their lonely wanderings in search of food.
  This is no graveyard  but the triumph of a 100,000 crabs successfully moulted.
  The green seas of Southern Australia  are particularly rich in such spectacular assemblies  but most of the creatures come together  for a very different reason.
  To breed.
  The giant cuttlefish,  the largest of all cuttlefish.
  They live for just one or two years.
  Now, as the Australian summer draws to an end,  they have one last act to complete.
  To find a mate.
  But there are over 100,000 males,  competing for the arriving females in this one bay.
  Among them a giant - a true Goliath.
  He probably weighs about ten kilos.
  Bands of colour sweep across his skin.
  That's how cuttlefish communicate.
  This smaller male couldn't possibly take him on.
  Beside Goliath, and under his protection,  a female who has just mated with him.
  But other rivals are still interested.
  It seems a small male wouldn't stand a chance.
  The female is now displaying a white stripe  along her side nearest Goliath.
  It's a clear signal that she no longer wants to mate with him.
  It's all the encouragement that the little male needs.
  He's going to have to use trickery.
  He tones down his colours  and tucks in his arms.
  He's just the right size to mimic a female.
  Goliath is deceived.
  The small male now displays a white stripe,  just like the real female, to deter his advances.
  He slips beside her  and they mate.
  By mating with multiple partners  the female ensures the greatest genetic diversity for her young.
  The sneaky male leaves,  his final act complete.
  So, even among giant cuttlefish, it seems  it's not all about size.
  Other males in these Australian green pastures,  take greater responsibility for their young.
  A weedy sea dragon.
  This is a male and he's carrying a precious cargo.
  While mating with the female,  he collected the eggs and attached them to his underside.
  Now, he's leaving these seaweed thickets  and travelling into more open waters  where elaborate camouflage is less effective.
  And there are many predators out here.
  And this is what the fathers risk their lives for.
  Dense clouds of minute shrimp.
  Mysids, one of a sea dragon's favourite foods.
  They're drawing other sea dragons out here, too.
  Finally, it's time for the young to break free.
  But algae has grown over these developing eggs  and it risks smothering them.
  Nonetheless, the babies are emerging.
  They've hatched successfully.
  The fathers return to the tangle of kelp,  where they're virtually invisible  while the young remain out here.
  But they will grow quickly,  surrounded as they are by their ideal food.
  Vast numbers of the oceans' young fish  start their lives in the green seas.
  One of the richest nurseries of all are the mangrove forests.
  Fringing the coastline of the tropics,  they form a natural protective barrier between land and sea  and are some of the world's most productive forests.
  Below the water, their arching aerial roots  give them a firm footing.
  Here, there's abundant food for baby fish.
  While the tangled roots protect them from bigger fish  and other predators that haunt the channels.
  But in Northern Australia,  with the receding tide  the little fish are forced to leave their shelter.
  And now, they are vulnerable.
  It's the most deadly assassin in the green seas.
  The zebra mantis shrimp -  a male, almost 40 centimetres long.
  But he's not hunting just for himself.
  He's collecting food for his mate.
  She may have been his partner for 20 years.
  She relies on him to bring her food  and puts her energy into her eggs instead.
  In a world so full of food,  this would seem a sensible strategy.
  But it's also a risky one.
  Were her male to disappear,  she could starve.
  Something has caught this male's attention.
  Perhaps an irresistible odour  or a distant call.
  Whatever the reason,  a male will leave his burrow  and his lifelong mate.
  An even larger hole.
  Females who have lost their mates  appear to send out distress signals to call in a new male.
  A larger female will produce more eggs.
  So by mating with her, he will father more offspring.
  But infidelity comes at a price.
  A larger partner demands more food.
  The richer a sea, the greater the competition.
.
  And there is one green sea  that supports more life than all the rest combined.
  Unlike the mangrove forests and the sea-grass prairies,  its location is in the open seas  and only temporary and unpredictable.
  This greenness comes not from rooted plants  but from clouds of floating ones.
  Billions of microscopic phytoplankton are proliferating.
  And in such numbers that they fuel one of the greatest feasts of all.
  Off America's Pacific Coast,  hundreds of common dolphins are rushing to a banquet.
  They're not the only ones homing in.
  So are sea lions.
  They're heading for Monterey Bay, California,  where algal blooms have caused an explosion  in plankton feeders.
  Anchovies - millions of them.
  The dolphins herd the anchovies towards the surface.
  Sea birds and sea lions take advantage of the shoal's appearance.
  It's a race to grab a share before others arrive.
  Humpback whales,  hundreds of them.
  With every upward lunge,  they sieve out up to 100 kilos of fish.
  They're claiming the biggest share  of one of the biggest feasts on Earth.
  So crucial are these tiny plankton,  that almost all marine life ultimately depends upon them.
  It's the green seas, not the blue  that are the basis of almost all life in the world's oceans.
  To capture the magnificence of the undersea forests  and the surprising creatures living here, the Blue Planet II team  have developed a series of specialist camera rigs.
  From the mega-dome recording half-in-half-out shots  at the top of the towering canopy  to state-of-the-art time-lapse equipment  that speeds up time to reveal the secret life of the forest floor.
  But, of all the creatures living in these forests,  filming one in the waters off the Cape of South Africa  was to prove the greatest challenge of all.
  Naturalist Craig Foster has developed a fascination  for its most secretive resident, a common octopus.
  There are almost 100 species of shark in these waters,  but that doesn't deter Craig,  who's swum here every morning for the past six years.
  When you find that really small, tiny, little oval hole,  then you know it's been killed by an octopus.
  And then if you look very, very carefully,  they're often in the vicinity of that.
  Craig has witnessed the antics of these octopuses  and wants to share his remarkable discoveries  with Blue Planet cameraman Roger Horrocks.
  Roger is immediately charmed by the strength of their personalities.
  It's really been astounding to see how individual these characters are.
  The common octopus all display different behaviours.
  Some were extremely timid,  some were very, very bold,  they have variety and it's really endeared me to them.
  After weeks of filming different individuals,  they finally meet one octopus  that's not only seemingly unafraid of the camera,  but willing to perform for it.
  She just came right up - whoop!  And then came right through underneath the tripod  in between my legs.
  Yeah, that's cool, amazing.
  She very quickly just completely accepted both of us.
  So, we've actually been getting these really intimate behaviours.
  It's amazing.
  I've watched this octopus for many months,  it's just trusting us in the water,  carrying on with normal activity which is just so fantastic.
  Months later, the team finally film their star octopus on the hunt.
  But then discover the grave consequences of sharing the forest  with so many other predators -  pyjama sharks.
  Pound for pound, these sharks are far more brazen  and aggressive than a Great White.
  They're like guided missiles.
  The slightest smell that octopus gives off, that shark will find it.
  The pyjama shark actually got hold of the octopus  and, I mean, I just assumed that was it.
  After spending so much time with this animal,  it was just so difficult watching her get attacked.
  Then, to their amazement, she fights back!  She put her tentacles down,  you can see them coming through the gill, basically,  closed the mouth.
 The shark couldn't breathe,  and that's what enabled her to escape.
  And just witnessing that whole thing was,  you know, it was an incredibly intense moment.
  The team are relieved by her escape.
  But when caught out in the open,  her next trick astonishes them even more.
  It lifted its arms and legs over its head,  and, at the same time, pulled the shell material with it  and created this extraordinary armoury.
  Octopus had armoured up and then, when that guy came  through from the back, he could kind of smell something.
  He's not seeing an octopus shape,  he's seeing that strange armoury.
  Then he was bumping the octopus,  and it was just incredible to see how that octopus  outwitted that shark using the armour,  using all his, his knowledge,  it's just absolutely phenomenal.
  She's a rock star, man.
 A proper little rock star.
  Thanks to Craig's and Roger's dedication,  the octopuses' astonishing behaviours are now known to science.
  What else might we find as we continue to explore  these fascinating undersea forests?  Next time on Blue Planet II  we meet the creatures that live where two worlds collide  and discover how they cope with the demands  of the ever-changing coasts.
 
                    (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)  DAVID ATFENBOROUGH: An olive ridley turtle.
  She's 3 ressting in the shallows off Costa Rica,  ha Ving swum a thousand miles to be here.
  All because the eggs she carries must be laid on dry land.
  Now she's returned to the very same beach  where she hatched 10 years ago.
  She must leave the safety of her marine world  and brave the alien world beyond.
  She's heavily laden  but the future of the next generation of her kind is at stake.
  All along the beach in a spectacle that has remained unchanged  for millions or years,  mother sea turtles emerge from the ocean  in their hundreds of thousands.
  Only those animals that overcome the great challenges  of both land and sea  can make the most of life here on the coast.
  Our shores are places of sudden changes and rich rewards.
  The Galapagos Islands in the tropical Pacific Ocean.
  Their barren coastline looks inhospitable,  but one group of animals has learnt to use it to their advantage.
  (EXHALES)  (BOTH BARKING)  Sea lions.
  Bachelors.
  They need to pile on the pounds  as only the biggest males will attract a female and manage to breed.
  If these young bulls fail to grow big enough,  they will remain exiled on this isolated shoreline.
  So one hungry young bull heads out alone.
  He's on the hunt for big game.
  Yellowfin tuna.
  Each weighing 60 kilos  with a top speed of 40 miles an hour.
  He can't possibly Catch one in the open sea,  but he has a plan.
  Ahead lies the entrance to the cove.
  He herds them towards it  into his trap.
  Driving them into a dead end.
  But they give him the slip.
  (BARKING)  He's failed.
  (CONTINUES BARKING)  But there might be another way.
  Now they head off as a team  to round up more tuna,  driving them back into the cove.
  The sea lions fan out channelling the tuna towards the bottleneck.
  Once again the tuna hit the dead end.
  But this time, the young bull doubles back  to act as a blocker sealing off the exit.
  This time when the shoal tries to escape,  he blocks them and drives them back into the next blind alley.
  The gang can now pick them off one by one.
  This clever fishing technique,  demanding foresight, planning and cooperation,  has only every been seen here in the Galapagos.
  Each massive fish provides them with five times more protein  than a normal day's hunting.
  Finally, the young bull leaves his post  to claim his reward.
  (SQUAWKING)  On a diet of protein-rich tuna,  he's well on the way to becoming a full-sized breeding bull.
  By using this cove,  these Galapagos sea lions have made the most of the opportunities  that occur where the coast? two Worlds meet.
  Coasts are the most swiftly changing of all ocean habitats  because of the tides.
  Tides are created as the moon's gravity pulls at the sea.
  As the moon circles our planet, the seas rise and fall.
  Typically twice a day,  creating the most constantly dynamic landscapes on Earth.
  Nowhere else do sea-living creatures face such changeable conditions.
  With the daily risk of drying out and being scorched by the sun.
  Where the tide retreats across a rocky share,  it can leave behind a temporary oasis.
  A rock pool.
  Seemingly, it's a haven of calm.
  But not for long.
  Turning minutes into seconds reveals unexpected dramas.
  In rock pools, grazers, scavengers and filter feeders  must all make the most of the few short hours  before the tide returns.
  Anemones gulp down anything they can reach.
  Though some meals are harder to digest than others.
  These magical worlds soon become battlegrounds.
  A deadly predator with five arms and on the underside a mouth.
  The ochre starfish.
  And it's in search of limpets.
  For some, there is no escape.
  But other limpets have a secret defence.
  They deploy a slippery shield  which allows them to slide to safety.
  And this limpet has its own personal bodyguard.
  A scale worm with a nasty nip.
  The starfish prefers food that doesn't bite back.
  The limpet carries on,  its bodyguard tucked safe under its shell.
  But there is one creature  that limpets have no defence against.
  A clingfish.
  It has teeth that can lever under the shell!  And twist the limpet off like a bottle top.
  The clingfish then swallows it  shell and all.
  (GULPS)  Rock pool dramas like these last just a few short hours  before the tide returns.
  Every day the sea becomes land and the land becomes sea.
  Bringing new opportunities.
  A Sally Lightfoot crab,  one of thousands of shore crabs just waiting for their moment.
  Every day they gather on the tropical shares of Brazil,  waiting for the tide to go out.
  Which exposes their feeding ground,  seaweed covered rocks, a hundred metres from the share.
  Getting there is a race against the tide.
  They leap from rock to rock.
  These crabs seem to be afraid of the water.
  And for good reason.
  The Moray eel.
  The chain Moray is a specialist crab hunter.
  It's blunt teeth can easily grip and crush a crab's shell.
  It's the crab's deadliest enemy.
  But the crab's feeding grounds are still a long way off.
  They must press on.
  Halfway.
  But their enemy has other ideas.
  Crossing the land  to reset the ambush.
  To feed, the crabs must keep going.
  But nowhere is safe.
  An octopus.
 Also a crab killer.
  The crabs make a dash for it.
  Made it.
  Risking life and limb  to graze on these seaweed pastures.
  But in two hours' time when the tide starts to turn,  they will have to run the gauntlet all over again.
  Tides are not the only force to have an impact on the coast.
  (WAVES THUNDERING)  The greatest waves originate far out to sea  and roll in towards the coast, growing as they come.
  As the shallowing sea floor drags at their underside,  their crests rise up to a hundred feet high,  topple over and break.
  Many of the biggest surfed waves in the world  are formed off Nazare in Portugal.
  Every day along this coast, the impact of the waves is equivalent  to one and a half million tonnes of TNT.
  Wave power gradually moulds and reshapes our coasts.
  In some parts of Europe,  waves wear away as much as three metres of coastline each year.
  The rate at which the waves reshape the rock  depends on its hardness.
  Where soft rock lies below hard,  dramatic arches are craved.
  It's an endless assault  that gradually sculpts vaulted cathedrals of stone  as here in northern Spain.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  And wave power creates towering fortresses  like these cliffs in these Arctic,  home to tens of thousands of breeding seabirds.
  The faces of the cliffs are accessible only from the air  and have plenty of nooks and crannies for those that can get there.
  But to feed, seabirds must still master the ocean world beyond.
  (GULLS SQUAWING)  The puffin.
  He's a fisherman  (SQUAWKING)  and a father.
  He has a mate for life.
  Both share the burden of raising their week-old chick,  their puff ling who needs five square meals a day.
  The parents alternate fishing trips.
  (CHIRPING)  It's dad's turn.
  (SQUAWKING)  When fish stocks are low,  puffins must fly as much as 30 miles  to reach the good fishing grounds.
  Once there, they plunge into another world.
  Good fishing spots are hard to come by, and they have company.
  Guillemots.
  Like the puffin, their wings are short and good for diving.
  Puffins can hold their breath for over a minute  and dive as deep as 40 metres.
  A catch.
  But it's a long way home.
  (BIRDS SQUAWKING AND CHIRPING)  (SQUAWKING)  After an exhausting round trip of almost 60 miles,  this puffin's nearly made it.
  But there are pirates on this coast.
  Arctic Skuas.
  All around returning parents are being robbed.
  The skuas' long rake back wings  make them faster and more manoeuvrable.
  Puffins must choose their moment wisely.
  A near miss.
  A last desperate burst of speed,  and it's made it.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING AND SQUAWKING)  Safety home after a three-hour round trip  (SQUAWKING)  where his patient partner is waiting.
  (CHIRPING)  Today their puff ling will eat.
  But where fish numbers are in decline,  many puffins now find it hard to get enough food for their chicks.
  In the changing seas of today,  it can be even harder to be a successful puffin parent.
  Overcoming the challenges of two worlds is seldom easy.
  One marine creature has virtually abandoned the sea altogether.
  On a few remote pacific islands,  lives the most terrestrial fish on the planet.
  At the top of this metre-high limestone cliff,  an eight-centimetre long blenny has chosen a nest hole.
  Up here, he can graze on the abundant algae  without any competition from sea-going fish.
  The females are feeding beneath him.
  He's keen to attract their attention,  but they are busy moisturising.
  Staying damp is essential as they breathe through their skin.
  To make himself conspicuous, he turns black  and flashes his orange fin.
  He catches her eye.
  But these Pacific leaping blennies,  seem afraid of the waves.
  They're poor swimmers  and will be easy prey in the sea.
  Time to try again.
  She's tempted.
  But once again distracted by a wave.
  The male just won't give up.
  Finally, she's hooked.
  He makes way  so she can enter his cave.
  And he encourages her to lay her eggs  with his seductive dance.
  He then fertilizes them in the safety of his nest.
  The blenny has given up the sea for a life on land.
  Others have made an even more successful move  but in a different direction.
  Penguins have abandoned flying  and instead spend most of their lives swimming.
  Their sleek survival suits of tightly packed feathers  are perfect for these freezing waters.
  Yet, they must still come ashore once a year.
  South Georgia, an island Wilderness close to Antarctica.
  (PENGUINS SQUAWKING)  Each spring, its beaches become the busiest on Earth  as hundreds of thousands of king penguins return here.
  (SQUAWKING)  They're heading for the colony.
  (GRUNTING)  But in their way lies the biggest wall of blubber on the planet.
  (ROARING)  Elephant seals.
  It's the breeding season  and the four-tonne bulls are fighting for control of their harems.
  (TRUMPETS)  Best to wait for them to calm down.
  (ROARING)  He can't fly over this barrier,  so he will have to walk as unobtrusively as possible.
  And hope that sleeping giants will continue to lie.
  (SNORES)  Careful.
  (SQUAWKS IN FRIGHT)  (SEALS SNORING)  This could be tricky.
  (PENGUINS SQUAWKING)  (ROARING)  A rival bull mounts a challenge.
  The penguins could be caught in the Crossfire.
  (ROARING CONTINUES)  Eight tonnes of blubber collide.
  (SCREECH ES)  The towering beach master is victorious.
  In the confusion, this penguin slips through.
  Ahead are 40,000 chicks.
  Hungry and over-excited.
  (ALL CHIRPING)  But not every penguin has a chick to feed.
  That's not why they're here.
  There is another reason.
  There is a trial of endurance that every penguin must face,  and it starts with a persistent itch.
  His Survival suit has been worn thin  by months of swimming in the rough southern ocean.
  His solution is drastic.
  Shed all four layers of feathers as quickly as possible.
  The process is known as a catastrophic moult.
  Until their feathers regrow,  penguins will remain rooted to the spot.
  (ALL SQUAWKING)  Having starved for a month,  they're now fully waterproofed and insulated once more.
  Lean, hungry and eager to return to a life at sea.
  (SQUAWKING)  Thanks to their Waterproof plumage,  penguins are able to make the most of both worlds  even in some of the harshest conditions on Earth.
  The coasts of South Georgia  are currently protected by their remoteness.
  Other coastlines are much more vulnerable,  and they are now changing faster than ever before.
  Two thirds of our major cities are on our coasts.
  It's estimated that in the next decade,  we can expect 10% of the world's remaining wild shores  to be taken over by human development.
  Yet every year, just off Florida's Palm Beach  and extraordinary spectacle appears almost unnoticed.
  The biggest gathering of coastal sharks on the planet.
  Spinners and blacktips.
  Ten thousand of them.
  Every January, they seek out these warm shallows  as a stopover on their migration northwards.
  Sharks have been gathering here since long before people arrived.
  But today, they face levels of pollution  and habitat degradation as well as fishing pressures.
  That their ancestors would never have experienced.
  It's not longer enough for coastal creatures  to master their own worlds.
  Now they must face the many challenges that come from our world, too.
  To film the most surprising coastal Wildlife,  the Blue Planet II team  travelled to some of the remotest shares on the planet.
  One destination was the Galapagos islands.
  Here they were in search of an almost unbelievable story  brought to them by a local cameraman Richard Wollocombe.
  RICHARD: Well, I was talking to a friend of mine  who's a fisherman over here,  and he said that one day he turned up here in this bay,  and suddenly he saw a group of sea lions chasing these massive tuna  up onto the beach.
  And I was like, "Yeah, funny one.
 I don't believe a word of that.
"  That just sounds too unreal.
  Still the lure of the fisherman's tale  was too great to ignore.
  RICHARD: I'm a little nervous that if it doesn't happen,  there goes my credibility.
  The Blue Planet II team launch a full-scale expedition,  but one of them is still skeptical.
  It's gonna be pretty spectacular if  if a sea lion could actually chase down and kill a tuna.
  I'm still yet to be convinced.
  They set up camp in this barren cove,  home for the next month.
  The local Wildlife, famed for its tameness,  is curious to meet its new neighbours.
  (SHOOING)  With no sign of the sea lions,  the crew stake out the cove with remote Underwater Cameras.
  Field assistant Rob y Pepolas takes ;First watch.
  ROBY: This is the point of view  where we try to see the sea lions come in  jumping over the water.
  If they're definitely coming very close,  they say, "Action, action," or "Rock and roll.
"  (LAUGHS)  Three hours later  (SPEAKING SPANISH)  The aerial team are first up.
  It's a sea lion Chasing tuna into the bay.
  Oh, he's got it.
 He's got it.
  Unbelievable.
!  Look at that, he's still struggling.
  Holy moly!  He's lost him.
  The tuna gives the sea lion the slip.
  Over the coming days, more sea lions arrive in the cove  chasing in yellowfin tuna.
  RACHEL: Yeah, yeah, yeah, ooh!  I bet you there's more tuna and another sea lion.
  There's like six tuna in that bay.
  One sea lion has caught Richard's attention,  and he's affectionately called him Tagboy.
  RICHARD: He's really different.
 He's, like, a prolific hunter,  and he's really agile.
  It's just fascinating to watch and see the picture emerge about who he is.
  From above, the drone is revealing  how the group of sea lions are hunting together.
  From the air, we really see the strategy of the sea lion  and see them with their individual roles as well.
  Tagboy stays off in the middle of the channel  to make sure none of them escape.
  Everyone's got a role  and they're really a team in bringing them together.
  Although the sea lions have been hunting in the shallows,  the crew are yet to see them drive a tuna onto the beach.
  And to make matters worse, the sea lions aren't alone in this cove.
  Galapagos sharks, each two metres long.
  The shark almost beached itself  and stole the tuna from the big sea lion,  who is now really angry.
  Despite the sharks,  to reveal the full story, Richard needs to get in the water.
  RICHARD: Classic shark attack scenario.
 Blood in the water, shallow,  and easy mistaken identity.
  RACHEL".
 Watch your hands, Ruby.
  DAVID: The crew gain some protection from chain mail suits.
  This is not a shark pool.
  One, two, three, four, five, six sharks (CHUCKLES) now.
  With so much blood in the water, the sharks go into a feeding frenzy.
  RICHARD: Make mince meat of these tuna in seconds.
  To be so close to something so unbelievably ferocious  and dangerous, quite frankly,  is amazing.
 It's It's  It's nice to be able to hide behind all this though.
  But then, after a week of increasing activity,  the sea lions suddenly stop fishing.
  ROBY: It's the first day though  that we haven't seen any action during the whole day.
  Since we start.
  We are kind of worried.
  The tuna have disappeared.
  Richard is worried.
  The signs are starting to show across the globe  that the seas are warming, they're becoming less productive.
  Galapagos marine life relies on cold, deep currents  welling up intermittently to fertilize the surface Waters.
  (BARKING)  If those upwellings become less consistent,  er, their lives could well be in jeopardy.
  In the past,  when these cold water upwellings have temporarily stopped,  many sea lions have starved to death.
  And a Warming ocean could further weaken these upwellings.
  Then after two weeks of nervous waiting,  a hopeful sign.
  A thick fog descends over the cove.
  We've got very cold water that's come up, upwelled,  and spread across the ocean,  and mixed with the warm air, creating the fog  and hoping that this cold water  will just kick things off a bit, you know, and get the action going.
  As the fog clears, a welcome sight  The tuna are back with sea (ions hot on their heels.
  The crew leap into action.
  (SPEAKING SPANISH)  Being in the water,  Richard can at last follow the sea lions' teamwork  and finally film Tagboy beaching a tuna.
  RICHARD: The know the bottlenecks in this labyrinth.
  They know how to push them into those bottlenecks  and there was just Tagboy,  almost his entire body was blocking the entrance,  and he was just gently back and forth tiring the fish out.
  Absolutely extraordinary.
 Really, really impressive.
  Director Rachel  has a newfound respect for the sea lions.
  RACHEL: I had no idea they were capable  of this level of planning and strategy and teamwork.
  I had no idea they were this intelligent.
  Richard has succeeded in filming this unique hunting strategy  and in doing so has proved the fisherman's tale to be true.
  RICHARD: The sea lions' intelligence is unbelievably sophisticated.
  So to say that my expectations have been exceeded  is a sight understatement.
  This is been one of the most remarkable times  I've ever had here in the Galapagos.
  Next time  We travel the world to uncover the biggest issues facing the ocean  meet the passionate people  who've devoted their lives to protecting it  and discover what the future holds for our blue planet.
  (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)      
                    (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)  In the course of making Blue Planet II,  we've explored every corner of the underwater world.
  We've encountered extraordinary animals,  and discovered new insights into how life is lived beneath the waves.
  For years we thought that the oceans were so vast  and the inhabitants so infinitely numerous  that nothing we could do could have an effect upon them.
  But now we know that was wrong.
  The oceans are under threat now as never before in human history.
  In this final episode,  we will meet the pioneers who are striving to turn things around.
  (GULLS SQUAWKING)  People who are helping to save the Ocean's most vulnerable inhabitants  and dedicating their lives to protecting the seas.
  But is time running out?  Many people believe that our oceans have reached a crisis point.
  So just how fragile is our blue planet?  Winter in the Arctic Circle.
  Every year, the waters of Norway are the setting  for one of the greatest wildlife spectacles in the ocean.
  Over a billion herring pour into these fields.
  The Blue Planet II team spent three years  documenting this astonishing event.
  Such a wealth of prey attracts predators  in extraordinary numbers.
  (ORCA WHISTLES)  Orcas  and humpback whales.
  But this migration hasn't always been so bountiful.
  Leif Notastad is a Norwegian fisheries scientist.
  It's been one of the most important fisheries  that we had for centuries along the whole coast of Norway.
  But in the late 19605  the herrings that we see around us here was on the brink of Collapse.
  50 years ago, fishing was so intensive  that the herring had all but disappeared.
  Orcas were seen as rivals  and hundreds of them were killed.
  It was only after the Norwegian government imposed severe restrictions  that the herring began to recover.
  (GULLS SQUAWKING)  Today, this is once again an immensely productive fishery,  closely monitored by teams of scientists.
  Marine biologist Eve jourdain  is one of the resident orca experts.
  From 1982, orcas got protected in Norway  and we have clearly one of the largest orca population in the world out here.
  There are now over a thousand orcas here.
  But with so many mouths to feed, including ours,  can the mistakes of the past be avoided?  To answer this vital question,  Eve and her team are using multi sensor camera tags.
  With the tags we try to see how the orcas interact with their prey.
  How they hunt and all about the underwater behaviour  that we are not able to see from the boat.
  A tag has to be attached  to the orca in exactly the right position.
  MAN: Here it goes.
 Here it comes.
  EVE: oh, that's a good shot.
  (LAUGHS)  It is the least invasive method.
 It is suction cups.
  So it is not a Scratch on the whale afterwards  which is something we really like.
  While studying the orcas,  Eve noticed a worrying change in their behaviour.
  They had worked out the easiest way to get a meal.
  EVE: We have seen that the orcas are waiting  for those fishing boats to drop the net.
  It acts like a dinner bell  and then all the orcas of the area gather.
  Quite a lot of herring slip from the net  and this is exactly what the orcas are looking for.
  But this new tactic is dangerous, as Eve has witnessed.
  We were there to monitor the behaviour of the orcas  scavenging around the nets.
  And we realised that one large adult male  was actually trapped inside the net.
  When the fishermen started to retrieve the net  the orca was obviously starting to panic  and trying to pull as much as he could.
  This orca was really fighting for his life.
  Stringent rules require fishermen  to get permission before they open their nets.
  But that took time.
  EVE: It was such a long process.
  We thought that the whale was going to die of exhaustion.
  Thankfully, the fishermen finally got the clearance  to release their net freeing the exhausted orca.
  It was a huge relief to see that this orca made it until the end  and finally got back to his family.
  With marine mammals and humans competing so directly  accidents are inevitable.
  Two days after tagging an orca,  it's released and Eve collects it.
  This tag is full of secrets, you know,  because it has been on the whale for several days  and will just reveal exactly what the whales have been doing.
  Pictures from the tag reveal the hunting technique in detail.
  They dive below the ball of fish  and then back flip.
  The tail slap stuns the herring.
  Eve can even work out how many fish the orcas are taking.
  EVE: They can kill up to 30 herring with just one tail slap.
  And then what is pretty amazing is  all the individuals of the group share the dead herring.
  And it's not just the orcas feeding here  Humpback whales are also drawn to the feast.
  They too are being tagged and monitored  giving fishery scientist Leif  a complete picture of how much herring is being eaten.
  The whales, they take probably less than 1%.
  The fishermen take less than 10%.
  So the balance there is that there is enough for everybody.
  Given that we manage to stock in sustainable  and a long term sustainable way.
  But it's estimated that almost a third of ocean fisheries  are being over exploited.
  The remarkable recovery of the herring here  demonstrates what can happen if a fishery is carefully managed.
  Our maltreatment of the seas has many effects.
  Some are predictable,  but there are others that are rather more surprising.
  Southeast Asia.
  The coral reefs here are among the richest on the planet.
  Marine biologist Steve Simpson,  is discovering how important sound is  to the animals that live in these bustling coral cities.
  STEVE: We're only now just realising by listening underwater  that the fish are making all these sounds.
  They use sound to attract a mate.
  To try and scare away a predator.
  You hear pops and grunts and gurgles and snaps.
  There's a whole language underwater  that we're only just starting to get a handle on.
  (MOANING)  (CHIRPING)  Using an advanced multi directional hydrophone,  Steve is trying to make sense of this extraordinary chorus  by working out who is making which noise.
  One fish is especially talkative.
  (POPPING SOUND)  It's perhaps the reef's most famous resident.
  The clownfish.
  While filming for the series,  we followed this particular family of saddleback clownfish  as they search for a suitable place to lay their eggs.
  It's a noisy affair.
  (POPPING SOUND)  STEVE: For clownfish sound really is everything.
  They spend all day talking to each other.
  You've got dominance and submission.
  You've got all the others calling to each other.
  It seems that they also use sound  in protecting themselves from the many predators that hunt around the reef.
  Including coral trout.
  Will this model trout fool the clownfish?  They react almost immediately.
  (THUMPING SOUNDS)  By mimicking a predator,  Steve manages to record their alarm calls without putting them at risk.
  STEVE: You can really hear the deeper pulsing sound of the female  as she tries to scare the coral trout away.
  And all the little ones are just popping Pop, pop, pop.
  As if to say, "I'm still okay.
 I'm still alive.
"  (THUMPING SOUNDS)  So they've got this real language of sounds that they're using  just to try and defend the colony against this coral trout.
  But that discovery has led to a serious worry.
  (MOTOR HUMMING)  STEVE: The fish were really popping away at the predator.
  But as soon as the boat came over they looked completely distracted.
  With all that noise it completely changed how the fish were behaving.
  Unable to make themselves heard above the noise of boats,  the family can't warn each other of danger.
  And so they are now vulnerable to attack.
  You think about how many boats are driving around.
  All of the ships, all of the offshore drilling.
  All the noise that we're making in the ocean  you realise just how much we're drowning out  this natural biological noise,  robbing animals of their ability to be able to talk to each other.
  All this noise may have serious consequences for many reef fish  because their babies, as soon as they hatch are swept out to sea.
  There they feed and grow until strong enough to swim back.
  And to find the reef, they use sound.
  STEVE: They listen in.
 They eavesdrop to the noises that they can hear  and they use that to choose which reef they want to make their home.
  But obviously because we're adding all this noise to the ocean  it's a wonder whether they can even hear the reef at all.
  (HORN BLOWING)  Man-made noise is now everywhere in the ocean.
  And it has an effect on marine creatures of all kinds.
  From tiny fish  to gigantic whales.
  But Steve believes there are solutions.
  STEVE: Noise in the ocean is a real problem.
  But, it's something that we can control.
  We can choose where we make the noise.
  We can choose when we make the noise.
  We can directly reduce the amount of noise that we make  and we can start doing that today.
  (MOTOR HUMMING)  We're only now beginning to realise  what an impact our noise is having on the inhabitants of the ocean.
  Other forms of pollution are only too familiar.
  Since its invention some hundred years ago,  plastic has become an integral part of our daily lives.
  But every year, some eight million tons of it  ends up in the ocean.
  And there, it could be lethal.
  While filming Blue Planet II,  the crews found plastic in every ocean.
  Even in the most remote locations.
  South Georgia.
  900 miles north of Antarctica,  this isolated Wilderness is the breeding place  for vast numbers of penguins and elephant seals.
  (SNORTING)  (SQUAWKS)  (GROANING)  It's also a favourite nesting site  for the largest bird in the sky.
  A wandering albatross.
  (SQUAWKING)  Here we learn of the extraordinary lengths  ancient parents go to give their chicks the best chance of survival.
  Each devoted parent travels thousands of miles searching for fish and squid  to feed their hungry chick.
  But despite all their efforts,  the albatross colony here is in trouble.
  Lucy Quinn is part of the British Antarctic Survey team  studying the birds here for the last 40 years.
  LUCY: Its only through looking at long terms studies  that you get a sense of these creatures.
  And the albatrosses here have, over the past 10 years, been in decline.
  There are a number of possible reasons.
  While foraging at sea,  albatross can get entangled and drowned by fishing gear.
  But Lucy is particularly alarmed  by what the parents are bringing back for their chick.
  LUCY: Albatrosses have the ability to cough up  bits of food that they can't digest.
  And from that we can tell what they've been eating.
  A healthy albatross chick in its diet should really have things like squid.
  So we can find the squid beaks that come out of the pellet.
  And also things like fish so we can find fish bones as well.
  But these chicks are being fed something very different.
  We have some plastic that this poor chick has had to bring up.
  Plastic bag.
  Here we have some food packaging.
 Looks like rice.
  Luckily for this chick, he has managed to get this out of his stomach.
  So, fingers crossed he doesn't have any more plastic left in there  before he fledges.
  For other chicks, plastic can be fatal.
  LUCY: Unfortunately, there is a plastic toothpick  that have actually gone through the stomach.
  Something just as small as that has actually has managed to kill the bird.
  It's really sad to see.
  Lucy collects and records what plastic she finds around the nests.
  LUCY: These are items that were regurgitated just from last season.
  And that's gonna be a vast underestimation  because that's just ones that we happen to find.
  There'll be many more that we never see being brought back.
  To find out where all this rubbish is coming from,  Lucy and her team have attached GPS trackers to adult birds.
  LUCY: It's showing where they're going to find food for themselves  and to find food to bring back for their chicks.
  It really shows us that they could be picking up plastic  from thousands of miles away.
  Plastics coming from either being dumped at sea  or also from people's homes.
  Plastic gets into the rivers and then the rivers flow into the sea.
  So this isn't just a problem around these remote parts.
  This is happening worldwide.
  And it's our rubbish that's going into the oceans.
  It's our problem that we need to solve.
  In some parts of the ocean,  it's estimated that there are now over one million pieces of plastic  for every square mile.
  And we're only beginning to discover  just how seriously that affects marine life.
  On the east coast of the United States,  researchers are investigating the mysterious deaths of young dolphins.
  The team is led by Dr Leslie Hart.
  It looks to be a young animal.
  Maybe a little bit over a year.
  So we're gonna try to find out more information on why this dolphin died.
  Looking at young dolphins  The very young dolphins, it's always heart-breaking.
  Leslie takes tissue samples.
  Their chemical analysis could provide crucial evidence.
  LUCY: We are often shocked by the high levels of toxins  that we detect in these animals.
  These young calves are dying for a number of reasons.
  But we suspect man-made toxins are playing a large role.
  And plastic could be part of the problem.
  Once in the ocean,  plastic breaks down into tiny fragments.
  Micro plastics.
  Along with all the industrial chemicals that have drained into the ocean  these form a potentially toxic soup.
  LESLIE: The really small organisms  can mistake these tiny, tiny plastics as food.
  Then the larger organisms eat the plankton.
  Then the larger fish eat the smaller fish,  and so on and so forth.
  Dolphins are at the top of this food chain  and it's now thought that pollutants may be building up in their tissues  to such a degree that a mother's contaminated' milk could kill her calf.
  Industrial pollution and the discarding of plastic waste  must be tackled for the sake of all life in the ocean.
  Around the world, people are now devoting their lives  to saving some of the most threatened sea creatures.
  As here in the Caribbean.
  Every year on just a few islands,  a remarkable event takes place.
  As the sun sets,  giant reptiles begin to emerge.
  (GRUNTS)  This magnificent creature preparing  Whoops.
 (LAUGHS)  Preparing to lay her eggs  is the largest of all turtles.
  A leatherback.
  They can grow up to half a ton in weight.
  And they have an ancestry that goes back a hundred million years  to the age of the dinosaur.
  But in recent times their numbers have fallen catastrophically.
  Here, however, in the Caribbean there is hope.
  (GRUNTS)  Leatherback turtles leave the sea  in order to lay their eggs in the dry sand.
  But out of water, these huge creatures are easy targets for hunters.
  In a small fishing village in Trinidad,  Len Peters has experienced this first hand.
  I grew up in a household where the presence of turtle meat was normal.
  The fridge was always full of it.
  Everybody Everybody harvested turtles, including my parents.
  It's only when I became exposed to things  that were being published about leatherbacks  who were on the verge of extinction.
  And nobody cares.
  That piqued my interest.
  Len took the leatherback's future into his own hands.
  He began patrolling the beach at night to protect the turtles.
  A brave thing to do.
  LEN: We were met with tremendous resistance.
  People would pelt us at night.
  I have had persons insult me.
  I've had persons curse me.
  I've had persons physically try to wrestle me with a machete.
  So it was really a hostile time back then.
  If Len was going to save these turtles  he needed to win over the whole community.
  LEN: We had to find a way to get the villagers to benefit  from the presence of these animals.
  He began to encourage tourists to visit the beach  and trained some villagers to be their guides.
  To help secure the turtle 's future,  he took the message to the next generation.
  Now what's What's the largest size a leatherback can grow to?  Uh, Shame.
  - 2,000 pounds.
 - That's correct.
  Leatherbacks can grow to 2,000 pounds.
  Well, that's a big turtle.
  Len's hard work paid off.
  And now, attitudes have changed.
  (TALKING IN DISTINCTLY)  LEN: It took us a while to reach out to the villagers.
  But gradually we got them involved as well.
  We got some of the poachers who would be hunting the animals to  be part of the conservation programme.
  As well as protecting the adult turtles,  the team also collect any eggs that might be flooded at high tide.
  LEN: If the eggs are laid too close to the sea,  we relocate the eggs and rebury them.
  Thanks to the efforts of this community,  these turtles have had an extraordinary change in fortune.
  This is now thought to be one of the densest  leatherback nesting beaches in the world.
  LEN: When we started at the height of the nesting season,  the numbers will be 30-40 turtles a night.
  Now, it's over 500.
  So, we have seen an increase from 40 turtles  to 500 turtles a night in just around 20 years.
  Precious new hatchlings are also given a helping hand.
  Any that emerge during the day are collected  to be released safely back to the sea, away from hungry birds.
  This little leatherback will have to face a thousand hazards  before it returns as an adult to this beach where it hatched.
  And those dangers will be greatly increased  because of damage that we have done to the ocean.
  Good luck, little leatherback.
  Protecting breeding sites on beaches  may improve the fortune of some marine animals,  but safeguarding them while they roam the high seas is much more difficult.
  Out here, there is little protection.
  Every night, thousands of miles of fishing lines laden with hooks are set.
  There's enough, it's said, to wrap twice around the world.
  Nets large enough to engulf cathedrals  trap hundreds of tons of fish at a time.
  Long distance travellers such as sharks are particularly at risk.
  It's estimated that tens of millions are killed every year,  including the biggest fish in the sea, the whale shark.
  Shark biologist Jonathan Green is concerned  that time is running out for these extraordinary creatures.
  We know that they're being fished possibly at a massive rate.
  They may be taken by the thousands, possibly tens of thousands a year.
  If that is indeed true,  we don't know how long they can withstand that kind of fishing pressure.
  To save them, Jonathan is flying to solve  the mystery of where they give birth.
  And, for the first time, he has a clue as to where this might be.
  Pregnant whale sharks are thought to be travelling from across the Pacific Ocean  to Darwin Island in the Galapagos.
  Jonathan is going to try and attach  a multi-sensor camera tag to a pregnant female.
  Okay.
 We're good to go.
  These sharks only stay in the area for a few days.
  This may be his only chance.
  Jonathan has to attach the tag before the shark dives to dangerous depths.
  The tag will remain on the giant's fin for two days  before it's automatically released.
  Once retrieved, it reveals some unusual behaviour.
  Oh, beautiful, beautiful.
  There's a silky rubbing at the in front.
 Next to her right.
  The silky sharks are brushing up against her rough skin,  perhaps to scrape off parasites.
  These predatory sharks make the surface waters very unsafe places  for young fish of any kind.
  There is a surprise in store.
  The tag's depth sensor reveals that she dived  to a depth of 600 metres.
  But down there, it's too dark for the camera.
  The only way Jonathan can prove if they're giving birth  is to go down and look.
  (RADIO CHATTER)  (RADIO CHATTER)  Out of the gloom, a shape materialises.
  Another massive whale shark.
  Oh, look at her.
 She's having a look at us.
 She's looking right at us.
  She is huge.
  And look at the belly.
 Absolutely massive.
  That's a large pregnant female.
  She's turning around.
 She's turning around.
  Goes to show we can follow them.
 We can follow them in the submarine.
  She leads them down into the darkness.
  MAN (OVER RADIO): Rover control.
 Passing 100 metres, descending.
  Heading down.
 I think she's accelerated slightly.
  She's too fast.
  And with the strong current running against them, the sub can't keep up.
  But, for the first time, Jonathan can see for himself  exactly where she's headed.
  What specifically Darwin could provide  is a safe refuge for those new-born pups where predators can't access.
  Perfect conditions for the formative years  of these ocean-travelling giants.
  That was unbelievable.
  (SIGHS) Dream of a lifetime.
  His discovery that pregnant whale sharks  are visiting this very deep patch of the sea floor  is strong evidence that this is indeed where the giants produce their young.
  If I can actually prove that they are giving birth in this area,  then we'll have the information necessary  to go to governments and actually say,  "You must preserve those routes that they're migrating through.
"  And then, and only then, can we really truly afford protection  for this beautiful ocean traveller.
  Today, less than one percent  of our international waters are protected.
  And the creation of marine reserves is vital  if we're to safeguard the future of many ocean creatures.
  It will require international cooperation.
  But here, too, there is hope.
  We can turn things around.
  We've done so once before.
  For centuries, the sea-going nations of the world  hunted the great whales until they were close to extinction.
  And then, in 1986, those nations got together  and agreed to put a stop to commercial whaling.
  Today, although a few nations continue to hunt whales,  some of the great whales are making a recovery.
  In the tropical seas surrounding Sri Lanka,  there are stories of vast gatherings of whales.
  When the civil war ended in 2009,  locals here were able once again to fish these waters.
  There were soon reports of assemblies of sperm whales,  the likes of which had not been seen for centuries.
  Marine guide Daya was determined to get to the truth  behind these fishermen's tales.
  DAYA: The fishermen told me that there are lots of whales  a little bit north from here.
  They didn't actually tell me a number,  but in big numbers, not one or twos.
  Er, many.
  It took him three years,  but eventually, he found evidence to support these rumours.
  (SPEAKING LOCAL LANGUAGE)  (SPEAKING LOCAL LANGUAGE)  DAYA: We saw about 15 sperm whales go past us.
  Then, another four came past us.
  After about 40 then passed me, I started counting.
  Still, they kept coming, so I lost count.
  I estimated that we saw about 300 sperm whales.
  Sperm whales were once killed in vast numbers  and it's thought that if the slaughter had continued,  the species would be in danger of extermination.
  But now, here at least, they are being seen in huge numbers.
  DAYA: I believe they come here to feed, mate, and raise their young.
  So, this must be a holiday spot for them, you know.
  At the moment, I don't know of any other place in the world  that, er, sperm whales gather like this.
  Although some whale populations are still in decline,  scenes like this prove that when sea-going nations come together,  they can achieve astonishing results.
  But today, the oceans face threats on a truly global scale.
  The Great Barrier Reef.
  The largest coral reef system in the world.
  Here, we filmed stories which reveal just how smart fish can be.
  This ingenious tuskfish, for example,  used a favourite coral anvil to smash open shellfish.
  This astonishing behaviour has been closely studied  by local scientist Alex Vail.
  We're calling Percy "Percy the Persistent"  because he took, like, an hour to open the first shell.
  He must have hit it well over 50 times,  but he just kept on going and finally got it open.
  Alex grew up on the Great Barrier Reef  on one of its more remote islands, Lizard.
  He knows the reef intimately.
  But, in 2076, while he was filming for Blue Planet II,  Alex witnessed a catastrophe.
  ALEX: When we started filming, everything was pretty much fine.
  All of the corals were basically healthy.
  But in the last few weeks, everything changed.
  I have never seen anything like this before.
  A combination of a warming ocean  and an unpredictable weather event called El Niño  raised sea temperatures to record levels.
  And this had a disastrous effect on the corals.
  The heat causes reef-building corals to lose their nourishing algae,  exposing their white skeletons.
  When temperatures remain high, bleached corals die off.
  The bleaching this year has been the worst in history  for the Great Barrier Reef.
  About 90 percent of the branching corals  on the reef out here at Lizard Island are dead.
  It also has disastrous consequences  for the other creatures that live here.
  ALEX: Percy swimming around out there.
  The really sad thing is that his castle's starting to bleach.
  If we lose our coral, there's a chance we're going to lose our tuskfish.
  It's incredibly sad to see areas that you've dived on  since you were a little kid just turn to rubble.
  I cried in my mask, when I saw,  you know, some of the devastation from this bleaching.
  In the last three years,  over two-thirds of the world's coral reefs  are thought to have suffered from rises in ocean temperatures.
  This is not the only challenge they face.
  Research is revealing how the fundamental  Chemistry of the ocean is changing.
  Professor Chris Langdon shows me what this might mean  for the future of our seas by pouring dilute acid over shells.
  And how much more acidic is this than the present ocean?  CHRIS: This is more concentrated than the pH of the ocean  but it accelerates the process so we can see something visually.
  So, what's happening is, these shells, they're made out of calcium carbonate,  and the acid is dissolving them.
  And coral reefs are made out of the same material as these shells here.
  But surely this is not happening in the ocean now.
 Right now?  What we're seeing here is more dramatic than what's happening in the ocean.
  But the shells and the reefs are really truly dissolving.
  Coral reefs could be gone by the end of this century.
  And the cause of this? Carbon dioxide.
  Dissolved in the sea water, it forms carbonic acid.
  The more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,  the more acidic the ocean becomes.
  Evidence points to the burning of fossil fuels  as the primary cause for these increasing levels of carbon dioxide.
  And this is man-made beyond question.
  Beyond question.
  But Chris believes all is not lost.
  All we have to do, and I say all, is reduce our C02 emissions.
  We can switch to renewable fuels, wind and solar,  instead of natural fossil fuels.
  And so, none of this has to  - develop to the worst case.
 - And that could fix it?  Yeah, absolutely.
 So, this future does not have to play out.
 It's up to us.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  As the climate changes, the seas warm.
  Our oceans are being seriously affected.
  And this is nowhere more apparent than at the poles.
  Antarctica.
  For the Blue Planet II team, this was their most ambitious expedition.
  For the first time in history, a manned submersible  will try to dive to a depth of 1,000 metres  and reach the Antarctic seabed.
  A true journey into the unknown.
  (RADIO CHATTER)  (RADIO CHATTER  MAN: Control rover.
 Passing 40 metres.
 Over.
  (INDISTINCT SPEECH)  Leading the team on this historic dive  is deep sea scientist John Copley.
  We get our first glimpse of this landscape.
  And the carpet of life around us is astounding.
  It's beautiful.
  Diving in a submersible gives John an entirely new understanding  of how this rich ecosystem works.
  But it also offers him a unique opportunity  to investigate how the ocean here is changing.
  While we're observing the marine life down there,  the subs are also recording what the environment is like,  so we're getting measurements of temperature, of salinity.
  It's hopefully gonna enable us to understand the changes  that are happening in this vital part of our planet.
  To get a fuller picture, John also lowers  a deep sea temperature probe.
  His data is contributing to an international attempt  to chart the rise in both sea and air temperatures.
  What shocks me about what all the data show  is how fast things are changing here.
  We're headed into uncharted territory.
  To truly comprehend  the effect of the temperature increases here,  John takes to the skies.
  From here, he can record the number and size  of the icebergs being produced as the ice shelfs melt and break apart.
  The bergs we're seeing all around us give you some idea  of how huge this process is that's taking place on the Antarctic.
  As the floating shelves break up, they allow water,  which has been locked up on land as ice for thousands of years,  to empty into the sea.
  And this is predicted to push up sea levels.
  If the ice shelves break up, then that opens the flood gates.
  Ice on land flows faster into the sea  and that's what pushes up the sea levels.
  So, what's happening here right now affects all of us.
  Already, cities like Miami here are under threat.
  Scientists predict that by the end of the century,  the sea levels could have risen by a metre or even two.
  Were that to happen, parts of this city would certainly be submerged.
  Around the world, hundreds of millions of people live near the coast,  and as sea levels rise, their lives will be seriously affected.
  It's now clear that our actions are having a significant impact  on the world's oceans.
  During the four years it took to make this series,  we've witnessed many of these changes first-hand.
  But we've also worked alongside men and women  dedicating their lives to safeguarding the ocean's future.
  LUCY: The oceans provide us with oxygen,  they regulate temperature,  they provide us with food and energy supplies.
  And it's unthinkable to have a world without a healthy ocean.
  CHRIS: I still think we have the capability  to change the manner in which we're wasting resources,  in which we're poisoning our oceans,  and we can look to a future with healthy oceans.
  LEN: When I look forward, I believe that if what we are doing  can be duplicated just a little bit.
  These animals will have a chance of surviving.
  JOHN: It comes down, I think, to us each taking responsibility  for the personal choices that we make in our everyday lives.
  That's all any of us can be expected to do.
  And it is those everyday choices that add up.
  We are at a unique stage in our history.
  Never before have we had such an awareness  of what we are doing to the planet.
  And never before have we had the power to do something about that.
  Surely, we have a responsibility to care for our blue planet.
  The future of humanity,  and indeed all life on Earth,  now depends on us.
  (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)      
                    1  Looking down from two miles above the surface of the Earth  it's impossible not to be impressed  by the sheer grandeur and splendour  and power of the natural world.
  Ten years ago, in a television series called Planet Earth,  we revealed many of those wonders, but today, much has changed.
  We can now show life on our planet in entirely new ways.
  Bring you closer to animals than ever before.
  And reveal new wildlife dramas for the very first time.
  But that's not all.
  Our planet has changed too.
  Never have those wildernesses been as fragile and as precious  as they are today.
  At this crucial time for the natural world,  we will journey to every corner of the globe  to explore the greatest treasures of our living planet  and reveal the extreme lengths animals go to  to survive.
  Finally, we will explore our cities  to see how life is adapting  to the newest habitat on Earth.
  This is Planet Earth II.
  There are hundreds of thousands of islands,  each one a world in miniature,  a microcosm of our living planet.
  The struggles to survive on these remote lands  reflect the challenges faced by all life on Earth.
  The tiny island of Escudo off the coast of Panama.
  Home to the pygmy three-toed sloth.
  This is a male and life here suits him well.
  Mangroves provide all the leaves he can eat  and there are no predators to worry him.
  Island life may seem idyllic but it comes at a price.
  There are only a few hundred pygmy sloths in existence.
  And he needs a mate.
  (SCREECHING)  That's an enticing call  from a female.
  Somewhere out there.
  And this, for a sloth, is a quick reaction.
  (FEMALE SCREECHES AGAIN)  The problem is, there's deep water between them.
  So what should any red-blooded sloth do?  Swim, of course.
  Could this be her?  He does his best to put on a turn of speed.
  But she's not the one.
  She already has a baby and she won't mate again until it leaves her  in about six months' time.
  Even life on a paradise island can have its limitations.
  (MORE SCREECHING)  But at least she can't be far away.
  The world's entire population of pygmy sloths is isolated  on a speck of land no bigger than New York's Central Park.
  The size of an island has a huge influence on the fate  of those cast away there.
  The island of Komodo in Indonesia.
  Home to dragons.
  Ten feet long and weighing an impressive 150 lbs,  these are the largest living lizards on the planet.
  It's unusual to find large predators on islands.
  Yet, for four million years, the Komodo dragon has dominated here.
  It might seem there wouldn't be enough food  to support such giants on this relatively small island.
  But reptiles, being cold-blooded,  need only about a tenth of the food a carnivorous mammal would.
  A single meal will last a dragon a month.
  There are so successful that their only serious competition comes from  others of their own kind.
  And there are some 2,000 of them here.
  This giant, however, isn't looking for food he's looking for a mate.
  Female dragons come into season only once a year.
  She's receptive.
  So far, so good.
  But he's strayed into someone else's patch.
  Another huge male thinks he is the king here.
  Space being limited on islands,  dragon territories overlap and that creates continual conflict.
  In dragon society, size is everything.
  But if rivals are closely matched, the outcome can be uncertain.
  Muscular tails strike with the power of sledgehammers.
  And their serrated teeth are as sharp as steak knives.
  Each tries to topple his opponent.
  Defeated.
  Only the most powerful dragons  win the right to mate.
  The limited food and space on small islands  can often lead to intense competition.
  But some islands are immense.
  More like miniature continents.
  And these provide opportunities for life to experiment and evolve.
  Madagascar is one of the biggest islands and also one of the oldest,  having split away from Africa over 120 million years ago.
  With time and isolation,  its animals have adapted to take advantage of every available niche.
  The island now has some 250,000 different species,  most found nowhere else on Earth.
  These are not monkeys, but lemurs.
  From a single ancestor, about 100 different types have evolved.
  The largest, the indri, seldom comes down from the branches.
  The much smaller ringtails wander in troops across the forest floor  searching for food.
  And tiny bamboo lemurs eat nothing except bamboo.
  With few competitors, lemurs have been free to colonise  almost every environment on the island.
  Even the most extreme.
  This baby sifaka has a hard life ahead of it.
  He's been born in the most arid and hostile corner  of Madagascar's vast landscape.
  If he is to survive here, he has much to learn.
  The spiny forest is like a desert.
  It rarely rains, so water and food is very hard to find.
  Moving from tree to tree is a perilous business.
  Here, nearly all the plants are covered with ferocious spines.
  His mother searches the tree tops for the youngest leaves.
  They provide the only food and water to sustain the family.
  At three months old, the youngster is starting to explore.
  All too soon he will have to fend for himself up here.
  But it's altogether easier to stay on mother's back.
  If he can master the strange ways of this forest  he will have a little corner of Madagascar to himself.
  Island life encourages animals to do things differently.
  And on some islands that is essential.
  There are islands still forming today  built by volcanoes.
  Some erupt explosively.
  Others pour out rivers of molten rock.
  Lava.
  In the last 50 years,  ten new volcanic islands have been formed.
  Newly created and often remote, they're hard for colonists to reach.
  Even those that do find these are tough places to survive.
  This is Fernandina, one of the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific.
  Young and still volcanically active, it's a desolate place.
  The surrounding sea, however, is particularly rich with life.
  And the frontier between these two very different worlds is the home of  one of the strangest of reptiles.
  Seagoing iguanas.
  They are vegetarians,  but since there's little food for them on the land,  marine iguanas graze on the sea floor.
  A big male like this one can dive to 30 metres  and hold his breath for half an hour.
  There are more than 7,000 individuals on Fernandina alone.
  And by bringing nutrients from the sea to the land,  the iguanas help other animals to survive here, too.
  Crabs feed on dead skin on the iguana's back  and, in turn, provide a welcome exfoliation service.
  While smaller lizards prey on the flies that pester the colony.
  But not all the relationships on this island are so harmonious.
  Marine iguanas lay their eggs in sand.
  In June, when the hatchlings emerge, they are vulnerable.
  They must join the adults at the edge of the sea.
  But the journey will be a dangerous one.
  Racer snakes.
  The snakes miss their chance.
  But more babies are hatching.
  And now the snakes are on the alert.
  This is the best feeding opportunity they will get all year.
  On flat ground, a baby iguana can outrun a racer snake.
  But others are waiting in ambush.
  Another hatchling has its first glimpse of a dangerous world.
  A snake's eyes aren't very good,  but they can detect movement.
  So if the hatchling keeps its nerve, it may just avoid detection.
  A near miraculous escape.
  The lucky survivors can begin learning the unique way of life  demanded by this hostile island.
  Although marine iguanas are expert swimmers,  they can't cross open oceans.
  But even the stormiest waters are no barrier for birds.
  Gale force winds and cold temperatures make the sub-Antarctic  islands off New Zealand particularly unwelcoming in winter.
  But, when the brief summer comes, temperatures rise and winds slacken.
  It's now that visitors arrive.
  All here to breed before winter returns.
  There's the Snares penguins.
  Shearwaters come, too.
  This is an excellent place for them to dig their nesting burrows,  for no predators have managed to get here.
  Soon the island is crowded with birds.
  Every one of them eager to make the most of the short breeding season.
  But not everyone has a partner.
  A male Buller's albatross waits for his mate.
  Each year they spend six months apart, travelling the ocean.
  They reunite here to breed.
  But this year, she's late.
  No, that's not her.
  The other birds come and go.
  The clock is ticking.
  If she doesn't appear soon,  it could be too late for them to breed successfully.
  Every morning the shearwaters fly off to collect food for their young.
  Everybody else seems to be getting on with it.
  The shearwaters' return marks another lost day.
  There are three million birds on the island, but only one matters to him.
  Could this be her?  At last.
  At first, he's a little coy.
  But not for long.
  They greet each other with the special dance  they've perfected over many years.
  There is much to do if they're to raise a chick before winter returns.
  But when you have been apart for six months, some things can't be rushed.
  Islands in warm tropical waters don't experience seasonal extremes.
  The Seychelles, lying off the coast of East Africa,  provide a sanctuary for sea birds all the year round.
  Fairy terns are permanent residents.
  They take a fairly relaxed view about what constitutes a nest.
  A bare branch is quite enough.
  Climbing onto it to incubate has to be done with care.
  Once a year, the noddies arrive.
  They do make nests,  and pisonia trees provide their young  with a rather less precarious start in life.
  Nesting on this island looks idyllic.
  But behind the beauty, there's a sinister side.
  The Seychelles fody makes quick work of an unattended egg.
  She knows something's not quite right,  but her drive to incubate is strong.
  The noddies too have a problem.
  As their chicks grow,  so the pisonia trees develop seeds that are sticky  and equipped with hooks.
  By the time the young noddies leave,  they carry these hitchhiking seeds away to other islands.
  But sometimes the pisonia trees are too successful.
  If a fledgling, testing out its wings, drops to the ground,  it can get covered with the seeds.
  Entangled and weighed down, if it can't free itself,  the youngster will starve.
  The pisonia may have failed to disperse these seeds  but it will soon have fertiliser for its roots.
  This is why some people call the pisonia the "bird catcher tree".
  The fairy tern laid another egg,  and now she has a tiny chick to feed.
  This chick is lucky.
  By the time it fledges, the pisonia seeds will have dispersed,  and the danger they brought will be gone.
  Even the most idyllic-looking of islands presents challenges  for the animals living there.
  But the greatest threat they face is change.
  Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean.
  For millions of years,  this remote speck of land has been ruled by crabs.
  Their ancestors came from the sea,  but most have now adopted a land-based existence.
  Given there are so many of them, they get on relatively harmoniously.
  They're the gardeners and caretakers of a tiny crab utopia.
  Once a year, they must all return to the sea to breed,  and the march of the red crabs  is one of the greatest natural spectacles on earth.
  There are 50 million of them.
  It's an event that has brought the island worldwide fame.
  But in recent years,  millions of red crabs haven't managed to reach the sea.
  An invader has occupied this island.
  Yellow crazy ants.
  They escaped from visiting ships and with no predators to control them,  they have now created vast super colonies in the forest.
  When migrating red crabs march into their territory, the ants attack.
  Squirting acid into the crabs' eyes and mouths.
  The crabs have no defence.
  Blinded and confused  they're doomed.
  Humans brought these ant invaders here,  and now humans are having to control them.
  Isolated communities may evolve from millions of years in relative peace.
  But, when new challenges arrive, they can struggle to cope.
  Of all the species that have become extinct in recent years,  around 80% have been islanders.
  Our impact on the Earth is greater today than ever before.
  Yet some islands are so remote  that few humans have even set foot on them.
  Zavodovski Island is one.
  It lies in the great Southern Ocean.
  It's not only surrounded by the stormiest of seas,  it is itself an active volcano.
  It's the last place on Earth you would choose to live.
  Unless you're a chinstrap penguin.
  There is plenty of food in these waters, but to exploit it,  the penguins have to risk their lives.
  Life here is dangerous in the extreme.
  (PENGUINS CHATTER)  But there are some benefits from living on a volcano.
  Its warmth melts the snow early in the year.
  And, by January, the Antarctic's mid-summer,  the island is covered in chicks.
  Parents take turns at guarding them  until they're large enough to be left alone.
  This mother's chicks are hungry, but she has no food left to give them.
  Their survival depends on their father returning with the next meal.
  But some don't make it.
  Skuas harass the colony, hoping to snatch a chick.
  She can't risk leaving them.
  Everything will be fine, as long as their father comes back soon.
  He's been fishing 50 miles offshore, but now he's not far away.
  For him, however, and for all the other parents here,  the worst of the journey is still to come.
  Tiny claws help him to get whatever grip he can on the rough lava.
  For these commuters, it's rush hour.
  Some have had a really bad day.
  The father now has a two-mile walk to the nest,  and a stomach loaded with food doesn't help.
  This is the largest penguin colony in the world.
  But as he makes the same journey every other day,  he should be able to do it with his eyes closed.
  It's true that there can be safety in numbers,  but numbers can also be something of a problem  when you're trying to find your own nest.
  The mother is still waiting.
  Her chicks are now desperate.
  (THEY CHEEP)  In the midst of all this deafening chorus,  he can recognise her particular cry.
  At last.
  Both chicks will get a meal.
  With a head bob of acknowledgement, their mother now leaves.
  It's her turn to do the feeding run.
  This formidable commute is the price these penguins pay for sanctuary.
  A strange vision of paradise to us, perhaps,  but, for one and a half million penguins, this island has it all.
  Islands may seem remote and insignificant,  but they are home to some of the most precious wildlife on Earth.
  The expedition to film on the island of Zavodovski  was the most intrepid shoot of the series.
  To ensure its success, the team have called in  Antarctic expert Jerome Poncet,  one of the few people to have set foot on the island.
  This whole region of Antarctica is rarely visited.
  And this is the planet's roughest ocean.
  After seven long days and nights at sea,  they get their first glimpse of the final destination.
  It's actually quite surreal after a whole year,  trying to put the expedition together.
  And then today we wake up, and there's the volcano.
  That's Zavodovski.
  The explorers who discovered this place  spoke of the stench of sulphurous gases,  treacherous waters,  and astonishing numbers of penguins.
  It seems not much has changed.
  Jerome's been round the whole place,  and there literally is only one safe area to get on,  and he's telling us  it's that rock face over there.
  The team must take everything they need to survive.
  There are the penguins!  Though the boat'll stay nearby,  they will need to be self-sufficient.
  But that means taking a tonne of equipment up this cliff.
  Just get to that lot to help.
  Many flippers make light work.
  They work all day getting the gear ashore.
  But the fact there are so many penguins on the island  doesn't make it easy.
  The hardest thing for us has been finding a pathway through,  because there's absolutely penguins everywhere you look.
  Finally, it's time to make camp.
  They choose a sheltered place that won't disturb the locals.
  But since most of the penguins won't have seen a human being before,  they seem keen to pop over and visit.
  Hello.
 Nosy neighbours.
  The team set off  to start documenting the daily lives of the penguins,  and what they find is astonishing.
  As soon as you walk over that ridge, you sort of get a tingly feeling,  because I've never seen that many animals in one spot.
  It's mind-blowing.
  It's like Glastonbury Festival.
  The whole landscape  is full of little black and white penguins waddling around.
  This is penguin paradise, and that's what we're trying to show.
  A promising start.
  But here, fortunes can change quickly.
  Summertime   Every season within ten minutes.
  As the snow melts, it creates an unforeseen problem.
  We purposely chose this campsite  because it was a place where the penguins didn't seem to go.
  I think we've realised why the penguins don't nest here.
  It's because of the spray and because of some run-off,  so we are literally in a bit of a bog.
  And it's not just mud.
  A couple of these guys, as they wander down to do a spot of fishing,  they tend to use my tent as a little poop spot.
  You kind of get used to it at night,  just hearing a constant splat on top of the tent.
  But, as you can see, all of the kit,  I'm afraid that's getting splat on as well.
  And, when the wind changes, it brings a noxious reminder  that they're camping on an active volcano.
  It's the first time we've smelt sulphur,  which is welcome relief from smelling penguins.
  It's smoking away.
  I think if they start running for the sea,  we're going to be calling Jerome pretty quick for the boat.
  Each day filming on Zavodovski seems to present a new challenge.
  Next, a huge storm hits the island.
  Only now do the team realise  just how tough life can be for the penguins.
  It's hard not to be moved by the effort they go to  to feed their chicks.
  These huge waves are coming in.
  The penguins are surfing here,  getting battered on these big boulders.
  Now and then you just get a penguin that gets catapulted  15 metres in the air it's totally ludicrous.
  And really, I think there are quite a few penguins getting killed in it.
  The beach in the afternoon was just a scene of death and destruction.
  It was absolute carnage.
  It was heartbreaking.
  I mean, they're trying so hard to get up the beach with broken legs  and bleeding and very, you know, sobering, really.
  After witnessing the struggles, the penguins must endure,  the team now face the same problem.
  Getting off the island.
  With another storm coming in, they decide to take their chance.
  Jerome has seconds to get in and out between the waves.
  Or the Zodiac could tip  leaving them all stranded.
  Hurray, that's the first box off the island.
  What took a day to get ashore must be off in minutes.
  And the swell is getting bigger.
  Their window of opportunity is closing.
  Look at this swell now, watch out, watch out!  The equipment's off, but now the team has to follow.
  She's just leaving us now, is she?  That's the producer, she's gone! We have to swim now.
  They're gone.
 Yeah.
  Luckily it didn't come to that.
  Safely aboard, they leave with an unforgettable experience  of how hard life is on an island at the edge of the world.
  Next time, we ascend into the planet's highest peaks  to discover a spectacular but hostile world,  where only the toughest animals can endure.
  This is life on the roof of the world.
  Mountains.
 
                     There are only a dozen peaks in the world that rise five miles high.
  All of them are here, in the Himalayas.
  Lethally cold, scoured by gales and blizzards,  these mountains are among the most hostile places on Earth.
  Yet, a few special animals manage to live here.
  Snow leopards.
  Like all creatures of the high mountains,  they have had to adapt both their body and their behaviour  in order to survive.
  Life at extreme altitude  has shaped some of the toughest animals on the planet.
  (LEOPARD ROARS)  The sunbaked mountains of the Arabian Peninsula.
  They may only be a fraction of the height of the Himalayas,  but they are still so dizzyingly steep  that in many places it's almost impossible to get a foothold.
  Yet Nubian ibex have made this their home.
  (BIRD CALLS)  The ibex choose the steepest cliffs to raise their young,  in safety, beyond the reach of predators.
  But living in this sanctuary comes with a cost.
  These nursery slopes are so steep,  there is almost no standing water up here.
  So to drink, an ibex family must descend into the valley  1,000 feet below.
  The mothers pick out the safest way down.
  With soft cloven hooves that grip better than any climbing shoe,  they are the most accomplished mountaineers.
  But the newborn kids are still having to find their feet.
  This is their first descent.
  One mistake could make it their last.
  Following the adults, the kids finally reach the valley.
  But once on level ground, they're vulnerable.
  Red foxes lie in wait.
  At the first sign of danger,  the young ibex instinctively run back to steeper ground.
  (KID BLEATS)  But heading for this particular rocky outcrop could be a mistake.
  It's a 30-foot drop.
  The fox has them trapped  or so it seems.
  This is what ibex were born to do.
  Scattering makes it hard for the fox to pick a target.
  And it certainly can't follow them up here.
  All it can do is wait for one to slip and fall.
  But these youngsters are fast learners,  and they're now almost as sure-footed as their parents.
  The fox will have to find its meal elsewhere.
  It's just not been a good day.
  Now, at last, the young ibex can drink.
  But they'll soon need to return to the safety of the sheer cliffs.
  Mastering precipitous terrain is always challenging,  but there are more fundamental problems for life in the mountains.
  The Alps.
 Europe's highest peaks.
  It's winter, and food is desperately short.
  A golden eagle has to spend every daylight hour  scanning the slopes for something, somewhere, to eat.
  Her seven-foot wingspan allows her to glide effortlessly  for 100 miles in a single day.
  Her extraordinary eyes enable her to spot prey from two miles away.
  But she is not the only one who's looking for food.
  When she spots a chance, she must move fast.
  She can dive at 200 miles an hour.
  Only a peregrine is faster.
  During winter, even eagles rely almost entirely on carrion.
  It's a dead fox, and it could sustain her for days.
  Other scavengers must defer.
  The hungry crows soon regain their courage.
  They'll try any trick to steal a morsel.
  And they are annoyingly persistent.
  But this mob are the least of her worries.
  A bigger eagle takes control.
  But this kill is too important to give up.
  So she must fight.
  For the moment, she's won the carcass back.
  But a kill like this will attract every eagle for miles around.
  As ever, the strongest wins the lion's share.
  Unable to defend the carcass any longer,  the first eagle must now continue its search.
  It may be many days before she feeds again.
  Only the most competitive  will survive the perils of the mountain winter.
  (RUMBLING)  An avalanche.
  100,000 tonnes of snow  travelling at 80 miles an hour,  capable of smashing everything in its path.
  The mountains of North America  are hit by thousands of avalanches every year.
  Yet one animal spends the whole winter  slumbering within the snow on these avalanche-prone slopes.
  And when spring comes, they emerge.
  All across these mountains,  grizzly bears make their winter dens  10,000 feet up in the deep snow of leeward slopes.
  And while they were half-asleep in the depths of winter,  their young were born.
  Now these cubs are taking their first steps into the outside world.
  This mother is leading her three youngsters  to a place where they can find food.
  (RUMBLING)  They need to descend as quickly as possible.
  The debris from an avalanche  is clear evidence that this slope is still dangerously unstable.
  This is not a place to dawdle.
  And they have another reason to keep moving.
  After five months in the den, these bears are very hungry.
  Bears that have hibernated throughout these peaks  now all descend to the valleys, where spring comes earliest.
  In the Rockies, seasonal change is swift and dramatic.
  In just a few days, the slopes turn from white to green.
  Meadows that only a few weeks ago were buried beneath the snow  are now full of life.
  But in these mountains, the good times will not last long.
  So the bears must feed as fast as they can.
  During the summer months,  an adult can put on 180 kilos gorging on plants  and, if they can catch them  - (MARMOT CALLS) - a marmot or two.
  But just now, the bears have something else on their minds.
  It's becoming warmer,  and the bears are keen to shed their thick winter coats.
  Mothers show the cubs what to do about this.
  They'll soon catch on.
  Some trees, it seems, are particularly suitable for rubbing.
  Bears have their favourites and will travel long distances to visit them.
  Some itches just have to be scratched.
  There are now around 30 bears in this one valley.
  As they rub, each leaves an individual and recognisable scent.
  So the tree soon carries a list of who's around,  which might help individuals to avoid a fight.
  To best spread their scent,  they really have to put their back into it.
  (BEAR GRUNTS)  But summer is short.
  Itches satisfactorily scratched,  it's time to eat.
  In a couple of months,  they will have to return to their dens to hibernate,  so now they must put on as much weight as they can.
  Winter in the mountains returns fast and hits hard.
  (WIND HOWLS)  Temperatures in the Rockies will drop to -54 degrees,  so cold that moisture in the air  freezes into tiny crystals called diamond dust.
  This bobcat is one of the few hunters to remain active in winter.
  Most of his prey is now hidden beneath the snow  that covers his entire territory.
  He hunts by listening for the faintest sound of movement.
  And to prevent crunching footsteps from revealing his presence,  he uses boulders as stepping stones.
  A mouse.
  But one is not enough.
  The deeper the snow, the harder it is to detect prey,  and the rewards for the effort can be disappointing.
  To say the least.
  By midwinter, the snow is so deep  that bobcats are forced to leave their territories  to try and find easier hunting.
  And this bobcat may be in luck.
  For this particular valley is blessed.
  A river here never freezes.
  It's fed by a volcanic hot spring  that heats these waters  to 50 degrees warmer than the surrounding air.
  Hungry animals of all kinds come here to feed.
  Throughout the winter,  the river is full of food  for those who know how to catch it.
  Here, even the coyotes have become fishermen.
  But hunting is hard for a cat that's not used to getting its feet wet.
  So he must choose his target with care.
  Goldeneye ducks.
  But can he get close enough to pounce?  (QUACKING)  Perhaps he'll have more luck on the other side.
  Here, steam from the river warms the surrounding trees,  so up in the branches, there could be prey.
  (CHIRPING)  If only he could get to it.
  It's 20 feet up.
  At last a squirrel.
  Not much, but enough to keep him going.
  To survive a winter in these mountains takes tenacity,  and bobcats have that in abundance.
  Snow on the equator.
  Unlike the Rockies, in these mountains  there are no marked seasons.
  This is Africa's Mount Kenya.
  It's 17,000 feet high,  which makes its summit some 30 degrees colder  than the surrounding savanna.
  Giant heathers, lobelias and groundsel grow on its upper slopes.
  They all thrive in the tropical sun.
  After all, every day is summer.
  But once the sun sets, every night becomes as bitterly cold as winter.
  The temperature drops to five degrees below freezing,  turning the mountainside into a garden of ice.
  (CRACKLING)  Everything freezes,  but the cabbage groundsels have a way of protecting themselves.
  They close up their leathery leaves to form an insulating blanket  that shields their vulnerable central bud.
  Night comes to an end  and the sunshine returns.
  The groundsels spread their leaves wide  to bask in the sunshine once again.
  Dawn in the High Andes.
  Here too, the rising sun brings rapid relief  to animals living amongst these volcanic peaks.
  Mountain viscacha are up early  to claim the best places to catch the sun's first rays.
  For others up here, the sunrise is even more welcome.
  At over 14,000 feet,  this is the highest flamingo colony in the world.
  At night, it gets so cold that even this salty water freezes over.
  And now the flamingos are trapped in the ice.
  (FLAMINGOS CALL)  Eventually, the sun thins the ice,  but it's still a struggle for the flamingos to break free.
  Walking on thin ice is always risky.
  And it's hard to retain one's dignity  especially when you're wearing stilts.
  At these altitudes,  the sun's power can quickly turn from salvation to threat.
  The atmosphere is so thin,  there is very little protection from ultraviolet radiation.
  By mid-morning, it's risky to linger out in the open.
  The viscacha are forced to head for the shade.
  Out on the lake, there is nowhere to hide.
  The white crust of the soda lake  reflects the sun's glare  and increases the impact of its ultraviolet rays.
  By midday, uncovered human skin will burn in four minutes.
  But this doesn't seem to bother the flamingos.
  In fact, they are on parade.
  During the breeding season,  the flamingos perform these peculiar courtship dances  even through the hottest time of the day.
  They are so eager, they don't even pause to feed.
  The rules are something of a mystery  but, after a month of dancing,  all the birds will have paired off  and will be getting ready to mate.
  Up here, there are few other creatures to bother the flamingos,  but then, few other creatures  could even tolerate these conditions.
  So for animals that have the endurance,  mountains can be sanctuaries.
  But rocky peaks which to us, perhaps,  seem a symbol of permanence,  are more fragile than they appear.
  Today in the Alps,  human encroachment is changing even the highest summits.
  In the Rockies,  rising temperatures are shortening winter hibernation  and stifling the growth of valuable food plants.
  And in the Andes, some glaciers  have shrunk by 50% in just 30 years.
  Even the Himalayas are now vulnerable.
  With most of the world's tallest peaks  and covering a third of a million square miles,  this is the greatest mountain range of all.
  And here, temperatures are now rising  faster than the global average.
  As the snow line retreats further and further up these peaks,  there is less and less space for wildlife,  and that is a challenge  for one of the most majestic of all mountain creatures.
  The snow leopard.
  Seldom seen, the detail of their lives has long been a mystery,  but now, at last, helped by the latest remote-camera technology,  we are getting closer to them than ever before.
  They are very rare only about four of them in 40 square miles.
  There is simply not enough prey to sustain more.
  They live solitary lives.
  Nonetheless, they are well aware of the presence and the movements of  their neighbours, because they leave messages in a few special places.
  They rub particular rocks with their cheeks  and then spray them with urine.
  The two perfumes create a unique signature.
  (SQUIRTING)  Any other leopard can know which of its neighbours passed this way,  without ever making direct contact.
  But there are times when snow leopards must come together,  and the event is often violent.
  An adult female and her daughter.
  She has devoted the last two years to raising her cub  and very soon, it will be weaned.
  For now, the cub is still entirely dependent on its mother.
  But staying together as long as this could cause problems.
  The female is now in heat again,  and any male that smells her signature will know that.
  (SQUIRTING)  From this moment on, her cub's life is at risk.
  Males kill cubs that are not their own.
  But the mother is now driven by an urge that she cannot control.
  She lets the males know exactly where she is.
  (LEOPARD CALLS)  From up here, she can be heard for miles around.
  (LEOPARD CALLS)  A young male emerges from the wilderness, eager to find her.
  Snow leopards meet so infrequently  that there is uncertainty and tension.
  And it's about to get worse.
  Another, bigger male has arrived.
  The mother and cub are trapped between the rivals.
  (GROWLING)  The cub is now in danger.
  Mother must act fast.
  To divert the males' attention from her cub,  she rolls over submissively.
  With the males fixed on the female, the cub has a chance to escape.
  (GROWLING)  The males close in on the mother from both sides,  keen to claim her for their own.
  A fight is inevitable.
  The female moves to escape and protect her cub.
  But the big male follows her.
  He will not let her leave until he has mated with her.
  With the males gone, the female is at last reunited with her cub.
  But she has been injured.
  The cub, however, is alive, thanks to its mother.
  Until her injury heals, she won't be able to hunt.
  Mountain animals survive on the very edge of existence.
  Mother and cub were not seen again.
  Until over a month later, high on a ridge,  a remote camera was triggered.
  The female cat.
  She's no longer limping, but she's now alone.
  Then, an hour after the female has left,  the camera is triggered again.
  It's her cub,  taking her first steps towards adulthood and independence.
  She is unlikely to see her mother again.
  But every now and then, they will be reunited  through the messages they leave on the marking rocks.
  Her mother has succeeded in raising her,  but life ahead will be challenging,  and she will spend nearly all of it alone.
  Only the toughest can survive  among the savage beauty of the world's highest mountains.
  Revealing a new perspective  on the lives of golden eagles in the mountains  would take two very different approaches.
  A traditional wildlife crew set out to film wild eagles  closer than ever before.
  Whilst an aerial team aimed to capture the hunting flights  of eagles high in the mountains.
  The helicopter crew soon have success in filming  wild eagles high over the Alps,  but there was one part of the story even they couldn't follow.
  Golden eagles can stoop at 200 miles an hour.
  To capture an eagle's-eye view of such a dramatic flight  would take a more extreme approach.
  I'm Aaron Durogati and I'm a professional paraglider pilot.
  Aaron believes that to fly like a bird, he must think like one, too.
  It's a very special feeling to fly with eagles  because I'm really looking how they are thermalling  and where they go to soar.
  This helps me to become a better pilot,  and I try to take inspiration from the nature.
  Wearing a specially designed helmet camera,  Aaron's aim is to film the perspective of a diving eagle.
  But before he can jump off a mountain,  first he needs to climb it.
  It's a tough 3,000m ascent for Aaron and his wingman, Armin,  as director Emma Brennand waits for news in the valley below.
  The ascent is slowed by a series of dangerous crevasses.
  After a tricky climb, they finally reach their launch site.
  But the weather up here is unpredictable  and a change in wind direction makes it impossible to take off.
  Aaron and Armin are forced to overnight in the summit shelter,  and with the cold knocking out their comms, Emma is worrying.
  They're well-trained mountain guides,  but it doesn't make it any easier to know that.
  I think it's going to be a fairly restless night for me as well.
  Whilst the paragliders prepare for a night on the mountain  cameraman Barrie Britton is setting out early  on a more cautious quest to film wild golden eagles from a hide.
  I've got to get everything set while it's still dark  and the eagles can't see what we're up to.
  Or if they saw any movement around the hide, then they'd fly away  and probably wouldn't come back for a few days.
  They're notoriously difficult birds to film.
  Even hide work is not entirely without risks.
  It's -20 outside.
 So this is a crucial part of the operation,  making sure the fire works so we don't freeze to death.
  Aah! Well, that's all the hairs gone on my hand!  Oh, well!  And we just have to be really quiet now  and hope the eagles come in when first light comes up.
  Eight sedentary hours later,  Barry's only reward is a dead leg.
  We haven't done a single shot today.
  Nothing has come.
  Anyway, that's the way it goes.
  After a long night on top of the mountain,  the weather is only getting worse.
  The team need to get down, but visibility's so poor  that descending on foot past the crevasses is too risky.
  Aaron decides it's safer to fly, but it'll be a bumpy ride.
  (TRANSLATION:)  Thick cloud makes it hard to avoid the mountains, let alone film them.
  Thankfully, they make it down in one piece, much to Emma's relief.
  We are very, very glad to see you both.
  Yeah, it's a bit hard up there.
  The team spend the next two weeks chasing weather windows  until at last, a clear flight.
  Trying to mimic a diving eagle,  the flying looks spectacular,  but the helmet-cam shots are less so.
  To stay safe at these speeds,  Aaron must turn his head regularly to check his glider,  and that is making the shots unusable.
  The team must quickly come up with a new plan.
  Back in the hide, all has been quiet  until Barrie spots an eagle scavenging on a fox carcass.
  Barrie repositions his hide to keep watch.
  Good stuff!  After 100 hours in the hide,  finally, his luck changes.
  That's one terrifying bird there.
  For me, it's fantastic just to see them so close.
  It's just beautiful.
  With Barrie's success, it's now down to the paragliding team.
  They've come to the Mont Blanc range with a new plan.
  Aaron's decided that the best way to keep safe and get stable shots  is to fly tandem with a cameraman.
  We've got to try and mimic how an eagle flies,  which is pretty hard because they're basically like the top bird of prey.
  John is nervous.
  It's his first-ever flight.
  Three, two, one, go.
  Eee ahh!  Yes! Woohoo!  - How is it? - Ah, man, that was a shock.
  Overcoming his initial fears, John begins filming.
  If you can go right of this, that'd be cool.
  The tandem wing allows John to get the shots  that Aaron was unable to get flying solo.
  Awesome, Aaron, very good.
  But it's not all plain sailing.
  The feeling of discomfort only gets worse  as Aaron begins the eagle dive.
  (JOHN LAUGHS)  I feel sick!  Oh, man!  Flying low and fast like an eagle  leaves little room for error.
  - (LAUGHING:) A little bit too much, do you think? - Yeah!  - Sorry, what did you call it, an unplanned landing? - Yeah!  They might not be as majestic as a golden eagle,  but they do capture a unique perspective  that conveys an eagle's life as never before.
  Next time  we explore the world's jungles.
  Places of surprise and invention unrivalled on Earth  where the battle for survival is at its most intense.
 
                     Earth is the only planet we know of where life exists.
  And, here, it does so in abundance.
  The jungle is Eden.
  It covers less than 6% of the Earth's surface  but it's home to half of all  the plants and animals on land.
  Jungles have just the right amount of light,  water and nutrients, and they have had every day for millennia.
  Life here should be easy.
  This is an indri.
  It's a primate, like us.
  And these forests in Madagascar are its home.
  But to survive here  it has to face one major challenge.
  Paradise is crowded.
  Life fills every niche.
  And, at any one time, a staggering variety of species and countless  individuals are striving for space and food.
  Like every jungle animal,  indri have to find their own way to survive  in the most competitive place on Earth.
  (INDRI WAILS)  (INDRI WAILS)  Jungles are complex places  tangled three-dimensional worlds created by lush tropical vegetation.
  90% of the animals here spend their whole lives up in the trees.
  And each of them has to find its own way of getting around.
  Hanging 100 feet above the ground, a spider monkey.
  They travel in family groups and find everything they need in the top  storey of the jungle.
  Up here isn't a place for the faint-hearted.
  With long limbs and a prehensile tail that can grip like a hand,  they're built for climbing.
  But imagine having to learn these skills as high up as this.
  One third of spider monkeys never make it to adulthood.
  This youngster is only a few months old.
  Her future depends on her ability to climb.
  Playing on a practice tree with her older brother and sister,  she's already learning to use her tail as a safety line  under her father's close watch.
  (THEY CHATTER)  She's keen to join in the game but she's the youngest and,  as is the way of things, she's not always welcome.
  (SHE GIBBERS)  So she chooses her own place to play.
  But not all trees are the same.
  This one is for more advanced climbers.
  Enthusiasm? Certainly!  (SHE GIBBERS)  Technique?  (SHE CHATTERS)  Room for improvement.
  Meanwhile, some of her family have moved on to look for a new patch of  fresh food.
  The top of the canopy isn't for youngsters.
  But Father's not looking and the temptation to join the others is  irresistible.
  She'll need to be careful.
  A fall from here would mean certain death.
  It's the first time she's been as high as this on her own.
  As she climbs still higher, the branches get thinner and thinner.
  (SHE SCREECHES)  (SHE SCREECHES)  Her tail has caught her  but now she's stuck in mid-air, unable to reach any other branch.
  (SHE SCREECHES)  Father, however, was watching.
  He's big and strong enough to form a bridge with his body so that she can  climb to safety.
  Lesson learned.
  But it's not just monkeys that live here, up in the treetops.
  And, if you are small, finding the right tree can mean a home for life.
  He's a Draco lizard.
  He's only the size of a pencil and he eats ants.
  This one tree could provide him with all he will ever need  a conveyor belt of food.
  It's a perfect place to settle down.
  Well, it would be  but there's already someone here.
  This larger male is the tree's owner.
  And Dracos don't share.
  The owner's flag is a warning.
  Trespassers won't be tolerated.
  The owner's not only intimidating  he's prepared to battle.
  A dead end.
  Safety is a long way away.
  Now he must choose.
  Fight  or flee?  Only in the jungle do you find lizards that can soar like dragons.
  He can travel over 100 feet in a single leap.
  It's a very fast and efficient way to move through the jungle.
  Maybe this new tree will have food and no resident owner.
  Everything in the jungle has to compete for space.
  Only 2% of the sun's rays reach the ground  so even the plants must battle for the light  they need if they're to grow.
  300 years ago, this Hura tree began its race for light.
  And every day since, it has absorbed the water and sunshine it needed to  grow into a giant.
  It has succeeded in doing what every tree must do to survive  rise above the gloom of the jungle floor.
  And, what is more, its success has given life to others.
  Its branches now carry 1,000 other plants.
  These particular ferns,  figs and orchids live only on the branches of other trees.
  1,000 plants growing on one single tree.
  Throughout the forest, this story is repeated endless times.
  As a consequence, jungles are home  to more species of plants than anywhere else on Earth.
  And they, in turn, support a wealth of animals.
  In Ecuador, the competition is at its most intense.
  Here, there are 100 species of hummingbirds alone  all fighting for nectar.
  Each flower only has a small amount at any one time,  and so it's first come, first served.
  One hummingbird has gone to great lengths to avoid conflict  with other species.
  Swordbills are the only bird with a beak longer than their body.
  And some flowers are too elongated for the other 99 species of  hummingbirds here to feed from them.
  A swordbill's extraordinary beak, however,  enables it to reach the places that others can't  the top of this flower, where the sweet nectar is produced.
  It has found a solution that means it doesn't have to join the fight.
  And, as each long flower blooms, it gives the swordbill a fresh supply  of food all to itself.
  But having a beak longer than your body does have its drawbacks.
  For a start, it's tricky to keep it clean.
  Harder still, how do you preen your body feathers?  Unlike the other hummers,  swordbills can't reach their feathers with their beak.
  The only option, a good old scratch.
  It's a little unrefined  but a small price to pay for an exclusive food supply  especially when feeding times are only too frequently interrupted  by storms.
  (THUNDER RUMBLES)  Jungles are the richest places on Earth  because of one remarkable fact  they make their own weather.
  Every day, water rises from the surface of the leaves as vapour.
  It's as if the trees breathe out clouds.
  They gather over the forest until, finally  they burst.
  Rain is the lifeblood of every jungle.
  And all have to do their best to endure the daily downpour.
  In some jungles, like here in Brazil,  it rains so much that, for part of the year, the trees are  almost totally submerged.
  The forest floor is 30 feet below the water's surface.
  This is a mysterious world, a place few people have ever explored.
  We have much to discover about the animals for which this is home  including some you might never expect to find amongst trees.
  Here, 1,000 miles from the sea, are dolphins.
  A newly identified species of river dolphin found nowhere else on Earth.
  (DOLPHIN WHISTLES)  In these black, tangled waters, they have become almost totally blind,  so they move slowly,  carefully using their sonar to scan the forest floor for fish.
  If this forest can hide a new species of dolphin  what else might there be here, awaiting discovery?  At the shallow margins of the flooded jungle,  rivers flow through lush vegetation.
  Here, food is so abundant, it supports giants.
  Capybara, the biggest rodents in the world  (GRUNTING)  giant otters the size of a man  (THEY SQUEAK)  and the rulers of these rivers  (SPLASH)  caiman.
  They grow to ten feet long and kill anything  they get between their jaws.
  But there are more artful hunters  drawn here from the surrounding forest.
  A jaguar, the supreme jungle predator.
  The river marks the edge of his territory  but here he has competition.
  (THEY GROWL)  (THEY ROAR)  (THEY GROWL)  He's now in the territory of a female.
  She has ruled this stretch of river for five years.
  This is her place to hunt.
  Capybara are strong and wary.
  The key is stealth.
  She needs to get within three feet if she's to pounce.
  Not this time.
  She's not the only female here.
  Each part of this jungle's edge is ruled by a different queen.
  Few places on Earth have enough food to support so many big cats.
  (LOW GROWL)  The male hunts in a different way.
  Weighing almost 300 lbs, it's hard to be stealthy  and with so many other jaguars around,  he doesn't bother with wary capybara.
  He seeks a different prey.
  He's become a killer  of killers.
  Jaguars have the most powerful bite of any cat.
  And he knows the caiman's most vulnerable point  the back of its skull.
  (CRUNCHING)  Hunters living in the dense understorey of the jungle  come in all shapes and sizes.
  But they share a problem.
  How to tell what is a plant, and what is prey.
  This is a game of hide and seek that can be won or lost  in the blink of an eye.
  The long contest between predator and prey  has produced mimicry of astounding accuracy.
  A leaf-tailed gecko masquerading as lichen.
  Some animals take camouflage a stage further still  and these streams in Costa Rica  are home to one of the most remarkable.
  A glass frog.
  A male, and tiny, no bigger than your fingernail  and almost entirely transparent  as he needs to be.
  Almost everything that walks past here could eat him,  even a cricket.
  His best chance is to stay absolutely still and trust that  the cricket looks right through him.
  Danger passed,  and that's just as well,  because he is a father  and he's guarding some very precious eggs.
  For the last few weeks, females, one after the other,  have visited him and entrusted him with their offspring.
  Some are now almost ready to hatch.
  There are several clutches on the leaf, and those at the top,  the most recently laid, are barely a day old.
  But in the jungle, there's always someone out to get you.
  This wasp is a specialist hunter of frogs' eggs.
  It's noticed the wriggling tadpoles at the bottom of the leaf.
  He mustn't move.
  The youngest eggs are the most vulnerable,  and he can't guard them all.
  But these tadpoles are not as helpless as they might appear.
  Incredibly, the unhatched tadpoles can sense danger,  and the oldest and strongest wriggle free and drop into the stream below.
  The eggs at the top of the leaf, however,  are still too young to hatch,  and now the wasps know they're there.
  But the male's back looks very like the youngest cluster of eggs  and that seems to confuse the wasps.
  Using his own body as a decoy is a huge risk.
  The wasp stings could kill him.
  He's managed to save most of his young.
  He'll have to remain on guard for another two weeks,  but in the jungle, just surviving the day can count as a success.
  With the coming of the night,  a new cast of jungle characters takes to the stage.
  Flying insects begin to glow as they search for mates.
  Fungi, unlike plants, thrive in the darkness of the forest floor.
  They're hidden until they begin to develop the incredible structures  with which they reproduce.
  Each releases millions of microscopic spores  that drift invisibly away.
  Many have fruiting bodies that reach upwards to catch any feeble current  there might be in the clammy air.
  But this one, as it grows,  becomes luminous.
  Why fungi light up has remained a mystery  until now.
  Scientists studying the brightest fungi in the world  think they may have an answer.
  Like a beacon, the light attracts insects.
  From far and wide.
  To this click beetle, a bright light means only one thing  a female click beetle,  so he flashes in reply.
  But he doesn't get the reception he was expecting.
  Confused, he starts searching for a female, and that helps the fungus.
  By the time he gives up, he's covered in the fungus's spores.
  And, as he continues his quest for a female,  he carries these spores to other parts of the forest.
  And there are even stranger things glowing in the jungle night.
  These are the multicoloured lights of a railroad worm.
  It's not really a worm, but a poisonous, caterpillar-like beetle.
  The yellow lights warn other creatures to keep out of its way.
  It's hunting for millipedes.
  When it finds the trail of one, it switches off its yellow lights.
  Now it only has a red light on its head.
  Millipedes can't see red light.
  So, to them, the railroad worm in stealth mode is virtually invisible.
  And that is the end of the millipede.
  Competition in the jungles forces animals to specialise  in every aspect of their life,  including courtship.
  This has produced some of the most beautiful and elaborate displays  on the planet.
  - (BIRD SQUAWKS) - A male red bird-of-paradise,  competing to attract a female by dancing.
  One has come to survey what's on offer.
  She is an independent lady,  and she will select whichever male takes her fancy.
  (BIRDS SQUAWKING)  She makes her choice.
  But now she doesn't seem quite so sure.
  No? Perhaps he's just a little too keen.
  Maybe he'll have better luck tomorrow.
  Red birds-of-paradise display in the treetops.
  Other members of the family dance in the gloom of the forest floor.
  This is a Wilson's bird-of-paradise.
  He's brightly coloured, but about the size of a sparrow.
  He's lived most of his life alone, but now he's an adult,  and he too needs to attract a mate.
  This little patch of light might help him do so.
  First, he tidies things up.
  Showing off in this jumble of leaves wouldn't be easy,  and his beauty will stand out better against a plain background.
  He doesn't want bright leaves to divert a visitor's attention.
  They all need to go.
  Even the green ones.
  Especially the green ones.
  His stage is set.
  A central pole, and a little patch of light.
  It's perfect.
  And now, he must hope a female hears his call.
  (HIGH-PITCHED SQUAWKING)  He can wait here for weeks on end.
  At last, a female.
  Time to take up position.
  She will judge him by the brightness of his feathers.
  But for the female to see him at his best,  he needs her to perch directly above his stage,  under the light.
  This might be his only chance to shine.
  Now, when she's looking directly down on him, he reveals a display  for her eyes only.
  In the gloom of the forest floor,  he is a dazzling blaze of iridescent green.
  The brightest leaf in the forest.
  And that does the trick.
  Each animal must find its own way of surviving the competition  of the jungle.
  This crowded world is so full of invention that almost all kinds  of animals on land can trace their origins back here  including us.
  These forests in Madagascar are home to one of our distant cousins.
  This female indri has fought to keep this particular patch of forest  safe for herself and her family.
  (HIGH-PITCHED SHRIEKS)  Every morning, the family come together to sing,  their way of reminding others that this is their home.
  Indri are so closely adapted to living here  that now they can live nowhere else.
  For them and the billions of animals with whom they share their home,  the jungle is a sanctuary.
  But this is changing.
  Even in the ten years since the head of this family was born,  one million hectares of the rainforest have been destroyed  in Madagascar alone,  and, with it, half the indri families that once lived there.
  The local people say the indris are our brothers and their song is  a call to remind us that we, too, once depended on the jungle.
  This Eden is still a place of wonder and magic.
  Something, surely, worth protecting.
  Jungles are still some of the least explored places on Earth,  and with good reason.
  They are testing places to work.
  Here in the flooded forests of Brazil,  the team are on the trail of a newly discovered species of river dolphin.
  So little is known about it that just finding it will be a challenge.
  Their base for five weeks is a hut on the only bit of dry land around,  but it's already occupied.
  It appears someone's been making a nest.
  A resident rat.
  - Hello, little rat.
 - And on the food cupboard  Hello.
 Are you a bit shy?  If the housemates are hostile, the hitchhikers are even worse.
  A large spider.
  Oh, my God.
  And a colony of aggressive red ants looking for a ride.
  Shall we knock into them?  They'll board the boat like a bunch of pirates,  and they'll gnaw our faces off.
  That might not be quite true,  but intimidating animals are the least of their problems.
  The flooded forest is not only vast,  it's impenetrable, and this new species of dolphin could be anywhere  in 150,000 square miles of tangled treetops.
  But the crew have a plan.
  Dolphins use sound to find their way through the flooded forest  by making clicks.
 Sonar.
  Waterproof microphones allow the crew to eavesdrop on the dolphins,  and so follow them.
  But that's easier said than done.
  So, this is the clear path.
  Can you see it? There.
  It takes them a week to get their first glimpse of this new species,  and even then, it lasts less than a second.
  There appears to be only one dolphin.
  And, frustratingly, it can pop up anywhere without warning.
  Been looking through the water and seeing bodies kind of appear  out of the murk, and then disappear again.
  Eventually, the dolphin leads the crew to an open gap in the forest.
  We made it! Yay!  Here, at last, there may be a chance of getting something in the can.
  Their first shot, but again, a single breath, and then it's gone.
  - Hello, you.
 - With the dolphin as close as this,  the crew can try a different technique  towing an underwater camera behind the boat.
  Dolphin literally just came up parallel to it.
  The problem is that the water is so murky, that the dolphin is  almost invisible, even when right next to the camera.
  However, now the dolphin is in this channel,  the crew can try a different tack.
  Michael Sanderson is a drone operator.
  As long as the dolphin's in open water,  it might be possible to follow it from the air.
  We've worked out the dolphins seem to be here,  and we can do the drone work, so this is our kind of best bet.
  Leaving Michael and his drone on the sand spit,  the crew head back to open water.
  But this is called the flooded forest for a reason.
  The rain here can be torrential,  and although storms normally pass quickly,  this one is clearly not a normal storm.
  Is it not working?  The motor has broken, and with the boat flooding,  the crew must head for the bank.
  It looked like the rainstorm was going to pass,  and it hasn't passed at all.
 It's very, very heavy,  and I'm soaked through to the skin.
  They're stranded, the kit is getting drenched,  trees are falling, and Michael is trapped somewhere down-river.
  This is the hardest rain I've ever seen in my life.
  - It's incredible.
 - I'm hoping Michael's all right.
  And there's been tree fall all up around behind us.
  Michael's down there on a tiny little sand spit,  with the other boat, with his opticopter out.
  Kind of scary.
  After two hours,  a break in the storm gives Michael a chance to rejoin the team.
  Just got caught in one of the heaviest storms I've ever seen.
  Got up to this much water on the tarp, and the other one, so  I don't know if this is going to live any more,  because that was on the floor.
  It looks like it's game over for the drone.
  Yeah, it was pretty scary, wasn't it?  Over the next 12 hours, the storm returns again and again.
  If this bad weather continues,  the crew may not be able to get back out to the dolphin.
  The next morning,  clear skies, and the drone might be fixable.
  But the longer it takes, the more chance that the dolphin  will have returned to the flooded forest,  and then it'll be back to square one.
  But finally, their luck is in.
  The dolphin is still there.
  For the first time, they have a chance to film  from the water and the air, and finally discover  what this elusive animal is really doing.
  They were in the boat and they were looking around and going,  "Yeah, there are some bubbles.
"  We were flying with the drone and we could see dolphins,  and while they thought they could only see one dolphin, we saw five.
  And they had no idea.
  The crew are surprised to find these dolphins aren't solitary,  but come together to hunt as a team.
  You're starting to see stuff with the drone that you suddenly go,  "I thought there was one dolphin there," and  then you count that there are five and then you're looking in one place  and they're all behind you, laughing at you.
  This new perspective has given the crew a first glimpse  into a mysterious jungle animal  in one of the least-known corners of the Earth.
  Next time a land of extremes that pushes life to the limit.
  Animals have extraordinary ways of dealing with the hostile conditions.
  Creating the most epic survival stories on Earth.
  These are deserts.
 
                     Imagine a world where temperatures rise to 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
  Where there's no escape from sun, wind and dust.
  Imagine a world with almost no food or water.
  These are the conditions in  one third of the lands of our planet.
  To live here demands the most extraordinary survival strategies.
  This is the oldest desert in the world.
  The Namib in south-west Africa.
  It's been dry for 55 million years.
  Life here for a hunter is as hard as it gets.
  A pride of lions.
  One of the very few that endures this desert's scorching temperatures  and lack of water.
  Hunting here presents special problems.
  A herd of oryx, the only prey within 20 miles.
  Out here, there is no cover for an ambush.
  It'll have to be a straight chase.
  They have failed  and each failed hunt brings the lions closer to starvation.
  To find enough to eat,  the pride continually searches an area the size of Switzerland.
  Three days and 100 miles later, and still no kill.
  These are desperate times.
  (BIRDS CAW)  A dry riverbed on the edge of their territory.
  The only animals here are giraffe,  but these one-tonne giants could kill a lion with a single kick.
  Lions seldom tackle such formidable prey  but this pride can't go on much longer without food.
  The whole pride must work together as a team if they're to succeed.
  Two lionesses lead the chase.
  Others race to cut off possible escape routes.
  The giraffe has the speed and stamina to outrun the pride  but it's being chased into a trap.
  Up ahead, the lead female waits.
  It's now up to her.
  Most lion hunts end in failure.
  But no lions fail more often than those that live in the desert.
  Once again, the pride must continue their search.
  (THUNDER RUMBLES)  It does, sometimes, rain in the desert.
  Here, in the American West, storms can strike with devastating force.
  After ten months of drought,  millions of tonnes of water are dumped on the land in under an hour.
  Over millions of years,  sand and gravel carried by the rampaging floods  have carved channels through the solid rock.
  Slot canyons, 150 feet deep.
  In some places, these canyons have widened  until the land between them is sculpted into tablelands  and isolated pinnacles,  some of the most dramatic landscapes on the planet.
  The rain may be long gone  but there is water here  locked away within the tissues of specialist desert plants.
  Cacti are unique to American deserts.
  They all hoard water,  storing it in swollen stems  and protecting it behind a barricade of spines.
  They're so successful that they dominate these deserts.
  But this forest of spikes can cause  problems for the animals that live here.
  A Harrisxxx hawk.
  It has developed special techniques for hunting amongst the cacti.
  Ground squirrels.
  Prey.
  At the first sign of danger they bolt for the safety of the thorns.
  But the hawks have a tactic to flush them out.
  These are the only birds of prey that hunt in packs.
  Flying in formation, they try to drive their quarry into the open.
  But this squirrel is staying put.
  So now the hawks continue the hunt  on foot.
  They're closing in from all sides.
  Soon, all escape routes are cut off.
  The squirrel is trapped.
  The spines that cover almost every plant in this desert  can provide protection and shelter for many animals.
  So, why should these spikes be hung with corpses?  What kind of creature could be responsible  for creating such a gruesome scene?  There's a mysterious killer at work in this desert.
  It's a butcherbird.
  This little songbird uses the spines as a butcher uses his hook  to hold its prey as it dismembers it.
  (CHICKS SQUAWK)  And with chicks to feed, he also uses the spines as a larder.
  He's been stocking it for weeks.
  Hanging his prey out of the reach of scavengers on the ground  ensures that his newly hatched young will never go hungry.
  An ingenious solution to making the good times last in the desert  if a little macabre.
  (CHICKS SQUAWK)  Some deserts are so arid,  they appear totally devoid of all vegetation.
  Yet even these landscapes can be transformed in a matter of days.
  The deserts of Peru are amongst the driest in the world,  but just add a little water and plants that have lain dormant  for months will burst into life.
  And when a desert suddenly turns green,  even the most seemingly desolate can become a land of opportunity.
  No creature exploits the greening of a desert more quickly  or more dramatically than a locust.
  Madagascar's arid south-west  has received its highest rainfall in years.
  Now, an army is on the march,  attracted by the smell of newly sprouting grass.
  Locusts are normally solitary creatures,  but when food becomes suddenly plentiful they come together  into an unstoppable force that devours everything in its path.
  But this devastation is about to get a lot worse.
  The locusts now transform into winged adults,  and with conditions as good as this,  they do so three times faster than normal.
  Now they are at their most voracious  and with wings, they can take to the skies.
  Once airborne, the locusts can travel over 60 miles a day  in their search for new feeding grounds.
  A super swarm of this scale may only appear once in a decade.
  This one extends over 200 square miles  and contains several billion individuals.
  Between them, they will devour 40,000 tonnes of food in a day.
  Nothing can strip a land of its vegetation with such speed  and thoroughness as a plague of locusts.
  When the food eventually runs out, the whole army will die  but not before it's devastated the land.
  With no plants to bind them,  thin soils soon turn to dust and blow away.
  Now, these barren lands are left to the mercy of the elements.
  Scorched by the sun and scoured by windblown sand,  desert rock is shaped into strange, otherworldly landscapes.
  These rocky deserts may have a beguiling beauty,  but when they become this barren, very little life can endure.
  For many animals, the only way to survive the most hostile times  is to keep moving.
  In the Kalahari, brief rains have given way to the dry season.
  Food and water are becoming increasingly scarce.
  For these zebra, it's time to leave.
  They're setting off on  the longest overland migration made by any mammal in Africa,  marching towards the scent of distant rains.
  As drought intensifies,  desert-living elephants must also undertake long journeys  in search of water.
  The older females can remember where,  even in times of extreme drought, there may still be water  and sometimes lead the herd to a water hole they may not have visited  for decades.
  These zebra are almost at the end of their journey.
  This is what they've been heading for  a rare water hole.
  In deserts, most water holes are short lived.
  They appear after rains,  but then vanish almost as quickly as they came.
  Animals have come here from many miles around.
  Yet this can be a dangerous place in which to linger.
  60 miles away, in the heart of the desert,  sandgrouse chicks are hatching.
  It's safer for them to be here.
  But being so distant from water is a gamble.
  With only their mother to shield them from the sun,  if they get nothing to drink, they will be dead within hours.
  Their only hope is their father.
  Every morning he makes the 120-mile round trip  to get water for the family.
  Grouse from all over the desert visit this oasis,  arriving together in large flocks,  and that is important.
  There's safety in numbers.
  The male snatches a drink,  but he also needs to collect water for his chicks.
  Using specially adapted breast feathers,  he can soak up water like a sponge.
  But it takes time, and he is in danger.
  Goshawk.
  Sandgrouse here are their main prey.
  Again and again, the male sandgrouse risk their lives  in order to collect water for their chicks.
  This is why sandgrouse nest so far from water holes.
  At last, he's soaked up as much as he can.
  Carrying a quarter of his body weight in water,  he can now set off on the long journey home.
  He's back, and just in time.
  He can give the chicks their first ever drink.
  But he will have to undertake this perilous journey every day  for the next two months until his chicks can finally make the flight  to the water hole for themselves.
  It's July in the deserts of Nevada in the western United States.
  The hottest time of the year.
  Bands of wild horses, mustang,  are converging on one of the last remaining water holes for miles.
  Now, water not only offers them the chance to drink,  it can also bring power.
  If a stallion can control access to water,  he will have secured mating rights to the entire herd.
  So stallions try to dominate these pools,  fighting off rivals who venture too close.
  A stranger.
  He's travelled ten miles to be here  because the pools where he's come from have already dried up.
  With him come his females.
  If he can't provide them with water, they will leave him  for the white stallion who already dominates this pool.
  So, he will have to fight.
  There is everything to lose.
  A broken leg or a shattered jaw  would mean a slow and painful death.
  A missed kick, and it's all over.
  The new arrival has won  and his prize is more than just the chance to drink.
  He has provided for his herd, and in the process,  stolen his rival's females.
  The white stallion's rule is over.
  Desert life is not only shaped by the scarcity of water,  but also by the relentless power of the sun.
  The highest temperatures on Earth  have all been recorded in its deserts.
  Changes in the climate mean temperatures here  are rising more than the global average and,  as deserts heat up, they are also expanding.
  Every year, a further 50,000 square miles of grass and farmland  are turning into barren stretches of dust and rock.
  In the heat of the day, surface temperatures can reach 160 degrees,  far too hot to handle for most.
  But not for this shovel-snouted lizard.
  Raising its feet off the ground in turn  enables each to briefly cool.
  But even this dancing desert specialist  can't stand the heat for long.
  One option is to find shade.
  Dune grass, the only vegetation here, provides virtually none,  but just an inch beneath the surface of the sand,  it is several degrees cooler.
  Avoiding the extreme heat imposes a rhythm on desert life.
  And many animals here choose the simplest option of all  staying hidden all day,  and only venturing out in the cool of the night.
  As darkness falls, animals appear from seemingly nowhere.
  And, among them, inevitably,  are hunters.
  One of the most voracious nocturnal predators  is also one of the hardest to see.
  This mysterious creature hardly ever appears on the surface of the dunes.
  But there are signs on the sand that can give it away.
  It lives only here, where the sand grains are so perfectly dry  and polished, that they flow almost like water.
  It's no bigger than a ping-pong ball.
  A golden mole.
  It's totally blind,  but there's nothing to see underground anyway.
  Instead, it has superb hearing.
  Its entire head acts as an amplifier  that picks up vibrations through the sand, so, to locate prey  on the surface of the dune, it has, paradoxically,  to thrust its face into the dune.
  Termites.
  Not easy to catch when you're blind.
  Far better to go into stealth mode.
  Once below the sand, it can detect the slightest movement  allowing it to strike with pinpoint accuracy.
  Well, most of the time.
  They can travel two thirds of a mile a night in search of its dinner  and right now, it has just detected its main course.
  Little wonder it's sometimes called "the shark of the dunes".
  Food can be so scarce in the desert that, even at night,  animals can't afford to be choosy about what they eat.
  Israel's Negev desert.
  Otonycteris, the desert long-eared bat, is on the hunt.
  Most bats catch flying insects on the wing, but there are so few  of these in the desert that this bat must do things differently.
  It has to hunt on the ground.
  But what really sets it apart is what it's hunting  a deathstalker scorpion.
  The venom of this species is potent enough to kill a human.
  Tackling it seems madness for a bat weighing just half an ounce.
  In the pitch-black, both predator and prey are effectively blind,  but the scorpion has one advantage  he can sense the approach of the bat through vibrations in the sand.
  Otonycteris must rely entirely on its hearing.
  If the scorpion doesn't move, it won't know it's there.
  The battle is on.
  Armed with crushing pincers and a sting loaded with venom,  this scorpion is a dangerous opponent.
  A direct strike on the head.
  Is it all over?  Not for this bat.
  Otonycteris clearly has some immunity to the venom,  but repeated stings must still be extraordinarily painful.
  And if the bat is not to go hungry,  it must catch another three scorpions before sunrise.
  Desert animals have developed remarkable strategies  to make the most of the rare opportunities that come their way.
  Although some deserts may not see rain for several years,  most will hold a little water in one form or another.
  The trick is simply knowing how to reach it.
  Dawn in the dunes of the Namib, and something magical is happening.
  Moist air lying over the neighbouring Atlantic is cooled  and blown inland, forming fog banks that shroud the desert in mist.
  This precious moisture lies tantalisingly out of reach  at the top of the dunes, and it won't last long.
  It'll be burnt off by the sun just hours after it rises.
  Darkling beetles race to the top of the dunes  to reach the fog before it vanishes.
  Some of the Namib's dunes are 1,000 feet high,  the tallest in the world.
  For a beetle no larger than a thumbnail, this is the equivalent  of us climbing a dune twice the height of Everest.
  But even more impressive is what it does next.
  Standing perfectly still, facing into the wind,  the beetle does a headstand.
  Fog begins to condense on its body.
  Microscopic bumps on its wing cases direct the water  to grooves that channel it towards the mouth.
  Before returning down the slip face,  it will drink 40% of its body weight.
  This little beetle has learned how to conjure water out of the air  in one of the driest places on earth.
  And it's not alone on the top of the dunes.
  Web-footed geckos use a similar trick.
  Surely, few animals go to greater lengths to get a drink.
  Unfortunately, Namaqua chameleons know that on foggy mornings,  the beetles coming down the dunes are juicier than those going up.
  The diversity of life that thrives in a world almost totally devoid  of water is truly remarkable.
  Success in the desert depends on an extraordinary variety of  survival strategies that have evolved over millions of years.
  But our planet is changing.
  The world's deserts are growing bigger, hotter and drier,  and they're doing so faster than ever before.
  How life will cope here in the future remains to be seen.
  Finding animals in these vast empty landscapes was a persistent problem  for the Deserts team.
  But surely this wouldn't be the case when they set out to film  one of the greatest concentrations of wildlife on earth.
  It can't be hard to find a billion locusts, can it?  OK.
  With news that freak rains have triggered  a mass emergence of locusts in a remote part of Madagascar,  the team sets off in pursuit.
  We've got some young hopper locusts just crossing the road  in front of us here.
 We've just had to stop the cars.
  Here they are, here, all on the side of the road, look.
  It looks promising.
  But though finding hoppers is easy,  filming them proves more of a challenge.
  Can we rethink this? Because it's not really working.
  The locusts are really skippy.
  Any kind of movement, they just freak out, So we're now doing  our best locust-herding techniques to try to get them to go  in front of the lens, which is proving harder than anticipated.
  This is my Monday morning locust-herding jazz hands.
  - Ah! - What? What's that?  - What? - It's a wasp nest.
  Soon, the crew find themselves surrounded by locusts.
  No need for jazz hands now.
  It's a good start, but the team still need to film the winged swarms  that complete the story.
  But, once airborne, they can travel 60 miles a day,  so finding a swarm won't be easy.
  Fortunately, the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation  are here, too, to help.
  The FAO are on a mission to eradicate the plagues  decimating crops across Madagascar,  and if anyone knows where the locusts are,  it's the local expert, Hasibelo.
  He thinks that they are moving this way.
  Time to go swarm-chasing.
  But chasing is the operative word.
  The locusts always seem one step ahead.
  It's amazing, really, because this plan's completely  - radically changing, hour by hour.
 - We now have to travel  several hours further north, which is  - a bit of a pain.
 - It's a bit of a pain.
  As they venture into the unknown,  it's clear it's been a very wet year indeed.
  Traffic is one thing, but boats on the road?  Unconventional traffic.
  Progress is slow, and soon stops altogether.
  The locusts are just across the water, so the team must follow  on this.
  What could possibly go wrong?  We're now stuck on, possibly, the world's most antiquated raft  trying to cross a very fast-flowing river.
  But, onwards and upwards.
  We've now got an hour-long river crossing, and we'll just have to see  what's on the other side.
  With the river behind them, it should be plain sailing.
  But once across, the team discovers that, yet again,  the locusts are nowhere to be seen.
  And, after two weeks on the road,  the local street food is beginning to take its toll.
  So Ed's not very well.
 Been yacking up and  And not very nice stomach.
  We just need to do whatever it takes now  to get us to where the swarms are.
  The next day, the team forges on.
  Briefly.
  Here's Jamal, our driver.
  What do we think? Yeah?  No?  The road has turned into a bog.
  The cars can go no further.
  We need to cross this area of water to get to the savanna  and find our locust swarms.
  And it's amazing to think that, with the combined might of the  United Nations and the BBC, we are eventually defeated by a puddle.
  Back to the drawing board.
  Once again, it's Hasibelo to the rescue.
  Well, we have a plan.
  Taking to the air was never on the cards,  but thanks to the FAO's helicopter,  the team can now play the locusts at their own game.
  More smoke?  This time, it's a billion locusts  and one very relieved producer.
  Woohoo!  Against the odds, the team has located a super-swarm.
  This is exactly what we've been looking for.
 We've driven halfway  across Madagascar to one of the most remote parts there is.
  It's just been a nightmare, but, finally, we're here.
  I mean, this is the biggest swarm we could have even hoped for.
  It is just amazing.
  Look at here, I'm going to film here.
  It's incredibly exhilarating, and yet totally shocking,  to think of the devastation that swarms like this are causing.
  It just makes you realise how important the FAO are  in getting this under control.
  I'm just going to run through it.
  I should be naked for this, but  Thankfully, Rob kept his clothes on, and, more importantly,  this plague has now been halted,  but not before the team had witnessed one of the biggest swarms  ever recorded on film.
  Next time, we journey to the world's great plains,  where spectacular gatherings of wildlife cope with extreme change  and surprising creatures survive in unexpected ways.
 
                    (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: One quarter of all the land on Earth  is covered by a single, remarkable type of plant.
  Almost indestructible, it can grow two feet in a day  And be tall enough to hide a giant.
  (GRUNTING)  That plant is grass,  and the world it creates is truly unique.
  The grass in northern India is the tallest on the planet,  home to some of the most impressive creatures to tread the Earth.
  (GRUNTS)  (TRUMPETS)  These are the good times,  but in just a few months, all this fresh growth will be gone,  and the animals will be forced to move on.
  That is the way things are on grasslands across the planet.
  A cycle of abundance, destruction and rebirth  that affects every creature that lives here.
  (ELEPHANTS GRUNTING)  The largest grassland on Earth, the vast Eurasian Steppe,  stretches one third of the way around our planet.
  Spring rain has brought fresh grass, and with it, new life.
  A relic from the Ice Age, a baby Saiga antelope,  just three hours old.
  His only company, his twin.
  Until they can stand, their mother has left them hidden in the grass.
  They should be safe, as long as they remain quiet.
  (CALLS)  For these calves, the clock is already ticking.
  Their herd will soon be moving on, seeking the freshest new grass.
  (CALLS)  Their lanky legs are a sure sign that they're built for a life on the move.
  Saiga always give birth to twins,  so their numbers grow rapidly just when grass is plentiful.
  Their bizarrely shaped nose can detect fresh growth  from hundreds of miles away.
  (SAIGAS BAWLING)  The young twins will now begin the nomadic life  they share with most animals on the world's open plains.
  (THUNDER RUMBLING)  Grasslands occur where rain is too sporadic for forests to exist.
  The rain that a grassland needs to survive for a year  might arrive all at once.
  (LIGHTNING CRACKS)  Storms like these can release 12 inches of rain in 24 hours.
  (HEAVY RAINFALL)  Not much fun if you're out in it.
  Eventually the earth can't soak up any more,  (THUNDER CRACKING)  and the grassland undergoes a radical change.
  (WATER FLOWING)  Many plants would drown here, but grasses thrive.
  They grow so fast,  their leaves quickly rise above the water and into the sunlight.
  Here in southern Africa,  water transforms one of the most remarkable grasslands on Earth,  the Okavango.
  Every year, 5,000 square miles of grassland are flooded.
  For one pride of lions, this poses a major problem.
  There may be plenty of prey around,  but lions struggle to run it down in water.
  The pride has three-month-old cubs.
 They've never seen water before.
  (CUBS MEOWING)  If their mothers don't make a kill soon,  the cubs might not survive the week.
  (YOWLS)  But fuelled by the flood, the eruption of grass attracts new possible prey.
  Buffalo arrive in herds 2,000 strong.
  (GRUNTS)  Powerful, aggressive and united,  they're the most dangerous animal a lion can face.
  (BUFFALO GRUNTS)  The biggest bulls don't run.
  They're simply too huge to be scared of lions.
  At 900 kilos, he weighs more than all five lionesses combined.
  The pride do have numbers on their side,  but one sweep of his horns could be deadly.
  One distracts the bull up front, while her sisters attack from behind.
  The cats must somehow topple the buffalo,  but with swamp under foot, they can't get any traction.
  The bull is weakening,  but the lions are tiring, too.
  It's now a battle of will as much as strength.
  To live, the bull must somehow shake off the lioness.
  (DRAMATIC INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC)  The bull is wounded,  but thanks to his two-inch-thick hide, he will recover.
  For the pride, these are hungry times.
  (CUB WHIMPERS)  But, ultimately, once the water recedes, there will be new life,  and new food to benefit all.
  In the right conditions, grasses have the extraordinary ability  to grow from first shoots to flower in a matter of only days.
  Grasses become the miniature equivalents of fruiting trees.
  (CRICKET CHIRPS)  And for creatures living within the grass,  this is a landscape as vast and towering as any rainforest.
  And excellent place to build a tiny tree house  for a harvest mouse.
  (SQUEAKS)  During summer, European meadowlands are full of food,  but only for those that can reach it.
  (STEM CRACKS)  Climbing grass is harder than climbing trees,  not least because their stems just won't stay still.
  Her prehensile tail acts like a fifth limb,  so she's as agile as a monkey clambering around in a tree.
  (STEM CREAKS)  And just as well,  for the best food in this tiny forest is at the very top of its canopy.
  Feeding up here, she's exposed.
  A barn owl.
  Not her finest move  But it did the trick.
  Harvest mice seldom go all the way down to the ground.
  It's a tangled and dangerous world down here.
  (INSECTS CHITTERING)  But she can read the pattern of the stems overhead like a map,  and so find her way home.
  And not a minute too soon.
  There are mouths to feed.
  (SNIFFS)  Her babies must fatten up quickly.
  They need to harvest the summer grasses while they're still rich with food.
  On the African savannah, too, seasonal grasses are filled with life,  but it won't last long.
  Carmine bee-eaters are superb aerial hunters,  experts at catching insects in midair.
  But they have no way of flushing their prey out of the grass.
  (INSECTS CHITTERING)  Once alarmed, most insects stay put.
  The bee-eaters need someone to stir things up a bit.
  (CALLS)  A kori bustard.
  It's the world's heaviest flying bird,  so it should be bulky enough to kick up some insects.
  (INSECT BUZZING)  Bingo!  Until someone else comes along and cramps your style.
  (CHIRPS)  Never mind, perhaps there are bigger opportunities ahead.
  What about an ostrich?  The heaviest bird of all.
  This time there's more than enough transport to go around.
  (SQUAWKING)  Soon, almost every ostrich has its own passenger.
  But free riders are only tolerated for so long.
  What the bee-eaters really need  is a creature so big it won't even notice them.
  (GRUNTING)  Nothing cuts a swathe through grass like an African bull elephant.
  The trick is to fly as close to the front of the giant as possible.
  They only have a split second to grab the prize.
  As more insects are stirred up, the competition intensifies.
  (FRENZIED CHIRPING)  With summer drawing to a close, the race to stock up is on.
  Soon, the grass will wither, and this opportunity will have gone.
  As the dry season takes hold,  food becomes increasingly thin on the ground.
  Now, only the most specialised predators on the plains can make a living.
  She may be spotted like a cheetah, but this cat is no sprinter.
  Instead, she has extra-long legs which give her a high vantage point.
  But a serval cat's main weapon are enormous radar ears.
  (GRASS RUSTLING)  They help her pinpoint prey hiding in the grass.
  But the prey she seeks are canny.
  Southern vlei rats.
  They know that any sustained movement can give them away.
  So they move in short bursts.
  (RUSTLING)  But even the slightest rustle will give her a clue.
  (RUSTLING)  Warm.
  (RUSTLING)  (RUSTLES)  Warmer.
  Missed.
  (RUSTLING)  (ANIMAL CALLS)  (RUSTLING)  (SQUEAKS)  In better times, she could catch 10 a day,  but now, with so few rodents around, she will have to go hungry.
  As drought intensifies, life gets tougher for all.
  Predators with permanent territories must tough it out,  while most of their prey disappear over the horizon.
  (GRUNTING)  To avoid starvation, many grassland animals follow a nomadic way of life.
  Over 2,000,000 wildebeests wander the East African savannahs  chasing the rains.
  And they are not alone.
  Arriving on the wing,  Jackson's Widowbirds also seek fresh grass.
  (CHIRPING)  Although, it's not just food that they're after.
  (CHIRPS)  This male wants a mate.
  He's grown elaborate breeding plumage for this moment,  but he needs a stage on which to show it off.
  By carefully selecting grass blades, each trimmed to the correct length,  he's creating something very special.
  He needs an even surface,  and a centre-piece.
  The stage is set.
  His bachelor pad is sufficiently neat and tidy to attract a female.
  The problem is,  can she see it?  (CHIRPS)  He has competition.
  (CHIRPING LOUDER)  It might take more than a little gardening to impress the ladies.
  Jumping is the right idea,  but he's misjudged the height of the grass.
  His rival makes it look easy.
  Time to raise his game.
  (BOTH CHIRPING)  It's not only who jumps the highest, but who can keep doing so the longest.
  Unable to go the distance, his rivals drop out one by one.
  Stamina has won him admirers,  now he can show off his courtship arena  And engage in a little romantic hide-and-seek.
  Finally, he's done enough.
  The East African savannahs support millions of grazers.
  (GRUNTING)  Each year they devour millions of tons of grass,  and yet there's one creature here  whose impact is far greater than all these animals combined.
  They're found wherever grass grows on the planet,  yet their labours go almost entirely unnoticed.
  One of the most remarkable is found here on the grasslands of South America.
  These blades are so tough that virtually no large grass eaters can stomach them.
  Yet they're harvested on an industrial scale  (CRACKING)  by tiny grass cutter ants.
  But they themselves can't digest one bit of it.
  So, why bother?  The answer is underground,  and it's very ingenious.
  Each blade is cut to length and placed into a garden of fungus.
  The rotting grass feeds the fungus, and in turn the fungus feeds the ants.
  But feeding 5,000,000 workers requires intensive agriculture.
  Luckily, they are an industrious lot.
  This colony alone will collect over half a ton of grass every year.
  With billions of ant colonies across the world's grasslands  all doing exactly the same thing, that's a mind-boggling amount of grass.
  It's estimated that over one third of the grass that grows on Earth  will be harvested by an insect.
  In northern Australia, termites memorialise their industry in sculpture.
  These astonishing mounds are 10 feet tall.
  They're always built on a north-south axis,  which is why their builders are called compass termites.
  These castles of clay  protect their builders from extremes of heat  and seasonal floods experienced on many grasslands.
  Termites manage to do what most grass eaters can't,  break down dead grass and extract the nutrients.
  But they themselves can be food for those that can reach them.
  (SUCKING NOISE)  A two-foot-long tongue  covered in microscopic hooks,  followed by claws longer than those of a velociraptor.
  (SNIFFING)  A giant anteater on the plains of South America.
  (SLURPING)  It can devour 20,000 insects a day.
  Powerful forelegs enable it to rip apart a termite hill with ease.
  And as the sun bakes the grass, the termites face new danger.
  (FIRE CRACKLES)  In minutes, fire turns grassland to ash.
  But the grasses are not dead.
 Their underground stems are unharmed.
  Weeks, months may pass,  but eventually the rains will return and the grass will sprout again.
  Some grasslands must endure not only fire, but ice.
  As winter approaches, the prairies of North America begin to freeze.
  (CRACKING)  (LOW GROWLING)  In summer, bison roamed freely,  almost continuously cropping the abundant green grass.
  Now, that grass is not only withered and frozen, it's about to be buried.
  Sixty million tons of snow now blanket this herd's territory.
  (SNORTING)  Pushing through deep snow is exhausting work,  and the bison are now slowly starving.
  Just keeping warm saps huge amounts of energy.
  (GROWLS)  Their thick coats can insulate them down to minus 20 Fahrenheit.
  It's now minus 40.
  The only thing that will keep them alive is buried beneath three feet of snow.
  And that's a problem shared with a surprising neighbour.
  The food the fox seeks is also deep beneath the snow.
  (GRUNTING)  The survival of both creatures depends on getting through to the ground.
  For the bison, it will be a matter of brute strength.
  Massive neck muscles enable them to shovel five tonnes of snow a day.
  Their light-weight neighbour needs more precision.
  (CHEWING)  The bison have reached their goal,  a mouthful of withered grass.
  And where the bison have dug, the fox now spots an opportunity.
  Every footstep counts,  but he mustn't break through  Yet.
  He listens carefully to pinpoint his target.
  (PATTERING)  It's moving.
  (SQUEAKS)  A vole.
  Small, but 100 times more nutritious than a mouthful of dried grass.
  To get through the winter on these prairies, sometimes brain beats brawn.
  Ultimately, life on all grasslands depends on the turn of the seasons.
  (CRACKING)  Five hundred miles further north than any tree can survive,  grass returns to life.
  (CALLS)  Caribou females have journeyed to the far north  to calve.
  (CALLS)  Over 70,000 caribou babies will be born in the next few days.
  As the calves appear, so too do the leaves of the newly sprouting grass.
  And the calves must strengthen quickly.
  Within days they will have to keep up with their parents  on a never-ending march.
  At one day old, they're already faster than an Olympic sprinter.
  They're testing the legs that will carry them thousands of miles,  better to learn their limitations now.
  (CALLS)  (CARIBOU GRUNTING)  It may look playful, but there's no harder life on the grasslands  than that facing these infants.
  The caribou mothers now join together,  each with an infant exactly the same age.
  They're setting off on the greatest overland trek made by any animal.
  But wherever grass eaters travel, predators lie in wait.
  (CARIBOU CALLING)  Here they are, Arctic wolves.
  They must seize their chance  while the caribou pass through their territory.
  (PANTING)  The wolf runs at the herd, trying to flush out the weak or the slow.
  A calf is separated.
  At full tilt, 40 miles an hour, the wolf is just faster.
  But the calf has stamina.
  Only a few weeks old, and this calf's will to survive is remarkable.
  And it needs to be,  for these young caribou have now started a journey  that will last a lifetime.
  Forever chasing the seasonal growth of the grass on which they depend.
  Like all grassland creatures, they are at the mercy  of these unpredictable but ultimately bountiful lands.
  Grass can survive some of the harshest conditions on Earth,  flood, fire and frost, and still flourish.
  So it is that grasslands provide a stage  for the greatest gatherings of wildlife on planet Earth.
  For the grasslands team, no location would prove as challenging  as that dominated by elephant grass in northeast India.
  The aim, to capture intimate images of some the world's most elusive creatures  using the latest technology.
  But they will need to be careful.
  (COCKS GUN)  (ELEPHANT TRUMPETS)  More people are killed by wildlife here in Kaziranga  than in any other national park on the planet.
  Every time we go into these tunnels,  we have to take an armed guard,  'cause there are so many animals in here that are dangerous.
  Tigers are probably the least of our worries,  but rhinos and buffalo,  elephants, sloth bear, all of them can injure you.
  And we gotta keep up with our armed guard.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team have bumped into their first obstacle.
  SANDESH: There's a rhino right there.
  Let's go back because it's too risky going through this heavy grass.
  Let's get in the open.
  - (SPEAKING LOCAL LANGUAGE) - There's another rhino.
  - Now we have two rhinos.
 - Let's get in here.
  Okay.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The guard throws a ball of mud to one side of the rhinos,  moving the animals on without harming them.
  (SHOUTS)  - We're okay.
 It's gone.
 - Okay.
  What about the other one?  Let's go, quick.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With the rhinos now a safe distance away,  the crew focus on the best spots to position their camera traps.
  I love that tunnel, the effect.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Over 100 scaffold poles provide the anchor points  for these secret cameras.
  When an animal triggers an infrared beam,  the cameras will switch on automatically and start recording.
  If it works, the remote-control cameras should capture close-up footage  without disturbing the animals or putting the crew at risk.
  Basically, that's about as much like grass as we can make it look.
  (CRICKETS CHIRP)  ATTENBOROUGH: As night falls, the crew head back to base for safety.
  It's time for the new technology to prove its worth.
  At dawn, the crew have a whodunnit mystery on their hands.
  CHADDEN: Oh, wow.
  That's carnage!  This looks like elephant, we think?  This is scaffold pole  they have bent.
 Look at that.
 (CHUCKLES)  It's a sad day.
 You win some, you lose some.
  And this time, the animals have outsmarted us.
  In fact, check this out.
 (CHUCKLES)  Whoo-hoo.
  So this is our little army of guards, protecting our trigger box.
  Do they bite? These ones, they bite?  Sting?  Whoa! Argh! Ow!  The little (BLEEP).
  ATTENBOROUGH: While Chadden irons out the bugs,  Sandesh has met some grumpy locals.
  Wild Asian water buffalo have extraordinary senses.
  Mothers will charge if they feel threatened.
  The guard carries a gun, in case a warning shot is needed,  and with good reason.
  More people are killed by buffalo than by any other animal in Kaziranga.
  (GRUNTS)  (SHOUTS)  That'll wake you up in the morning.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Many of the park staff have cautionary tales about buffalo.
  (SPEAKING HINDI)  The buffalo caught him here, through his throat  and the horn came out through his mouth  and flung him before running away.
  It's a miracle that he's still alive.
  ATTENBOROUGH: If the wildlife is unfriendly to humans,  it's proving downright hostile to camera traps.
  CHADDEN: Completely ripped out the scaffold poles,  they've torn the triggers.
  ATTENBOROUGH: While Chadden is convinced it's elephants,  the rest of the crew are not so sure.
  SANDESH: This is huge!  It's almost like a human footprint.
  You can see the front paw, the rear paw.
  CHADDEN: We are now two weeks in and it's very frustrating.
  I've never actually been anywhere where the animals  go after your equipment and destroy it, more than here.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It's time for the team to do some detective work.
  Here is our little security camera.
  If any animals are coming through and vandalising our main cameras,  we hope that they're being caught on these little things.
  ATTENBOROUGH: As the crew up their spying efforts,  the guards take them to a promising lead.
  Nothing attracts tigers like a rhino carcass.
  It's very fresh.
 It's like from the morning.
  And it looks like there's a tiger cub,  so it should be a tigress with cubs, coming to feed on this rhino carcass.
  It's pretty cool.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Chadden decides to give the camera traps one last chance.
  If there are tigers around, they might scare away the mystery vandals.
  Elsewhere in the park,  the security cameras are turning up some unexpected results.
  At nighttime, survived another Ooh!  It's a bear.
  Wow, that's a very rare sighting.
  SANDESH: I've never seen a bear in Kaziranga.
  In all my years, never.
  - Oh, his fingernails - Look at his claws, right on the lens.
  CHADDEN: So I thought this was elephant damage.
  I never thought we'd see a sloth bear doing that.
  That's amazing.
  ATTENBOROUGH: A return to the rhino carcass and the plot thickens.
  SANDESH: Our transmitter's gone.
  CHADDEN: That's what tigers think of camera traps.
  CREW MEMBER: Do you think there's a bit over there?  Pieces.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The security cameras have caught a new culprit.
  CHADDEN: Oh, my goodness, there they are.
  SANDESH: Ooh!  There it's a tigress, see that.
 It's a tigress.
  It snarled at the camera trap, look at that.
  Sure don't like camera traps.
  Okay.
  ATTENBOROUGH: With the technology struggling,  Sandesh decides to put himself on the frontline.
  CHADDEN: It's on.
 SANDESH: And now we're ready.
  Time to get the tiger.
  ATTENBOROUGH: He'll have no protection apart from a thin wall of grass,  and must hope he's as well-hidden as the local wildlife.
  Over the next five days, Sandesh plays the role  of human camera trap.
  (BIRDS CAWING)  Eventually, the more hands-on approach pays off.
  Traditional filming methods and a little bit of patience,  have helped reveal the hidden creatures of Kaziranga.
  (GRUNTS)  But it's good to know there are still wild places  where animals like to keep their secrets.
  (CREAKING)  CHADDEN: I knew it was elephants.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Next time,  we venture to the newest habitat on Earth,  our cities.
  To reveal the extraordinary ways  that animals survive in this man-made world.
  (THEME MUSIC PLAYING)  OCR and corrections by explosiveskull     
                    DAVID ATTENBOROUGH: This is the newest habitat on Earth.
  It's here that animals have to contend  with the greatest change that is happening to the face of our planet.
  In this decade, the urban environment is predicted to grow by nearly 30%.
  It may appear hostile to animal life,  but for the bold, this is a world of surprising opportunity.
  Jodhpur, India.
  (LANGUR CALLS)  A gang of bachelor male langurs  has come to challenge the resident alpha male.
  (GROWLS)  (CALLS)  This alpha rules over a valuable urban territory.
  (DOGS BARKING IN DISTANCE)  But maintaining dominance here is a constant struggle.
  The bachelors have united to try and overthrow him.
  (LANGURS GRUNTING)  If they win, one of the challengers  will take over the alpha's troop of females,  and may kill his infants.
  There are 15 males in this bachelor group.
  The alpha must evict every single one of them from his territory.
  He has chased half the bachelors away,  but a splinter group has looped back and is harassing his females.
  (LANGURS SNARLING)  (HOOTS)  Once again, he has to battle.
  (LANGURS BARKING)  (BARKS)  Finally, he manages to expel them all.
  He returns home victorious,  but with a serious wound on his right leg.
  It's a hard life for him in the city.
  Keeping the intruders away is a daily challenge.
  But it's worth it.
  For these urban territories  are probably the best langur territories in the world.
  They're filled with rich feeding grounds.
  (BIRDS CAWING)  Here in the temple gardens,  the langurs have, over centuries, developed a surprising relationship.
  One that guarantee's them a constantly replenished source of food.
  (BIRDS CALLING)  The people here associate langurs with the Hindu God, Lord Hanuman,  and revere them.
  They're given all the food they can eat.
  And this high-energy diet has led to a baby boom.
  Female langurs in this city  give birth to twice as many young as their forest counterparts.
  This mother is so well fed that her rich milk  can support something rarely seen in the wild.
  Twins.
  And all these babies can create troops  that are far larger than those found in the forests nearby.
  With less time spent looking for food, there is more time for play.
  (LANGURS SQUEALING)  The rewards of living in a city can be huge.
  The challenge is to find your niche.
  (SIRENS WAILING)  New York City.
  (HORNS HONKING)  This densely built-up landscape is as unnatural as anywhere on Earth.
  (BRAKES SCREECHING)  (BIRDS CALLING)  And yet, this wild peregrine falcon looks out onto an ideal habitat.
  Strange as it may seem, this vastly-altered landscape  replicates the conditions in which peregrines evolved.
  The towering buildings have a multitude of ledges  on which falcons can nest,  and the high perches that they need to catch the wind.
  (FALCONS SCREECHING)  New York City has the highest density  of nesting peregrines anywhere on the planet.
  Winds striking the sides of the skyscrapers  are deflected upwards and can help the birds gain height.
  And the great areas of concrete roasting in the sun create thermals,  so that, with very little effort, the birds can soar over the city.
  And so many peregrines can live here,  because down at street level, there is a lot of potential prey.
  (PIGEONS CHIRPING)  Diving from height, the falcons can reach speeds  of over 200 miles an hour.
  But their prey stay down low and close to the buildings.
  Too risky.
  The peregrine pulls out of his stoop.
  But the effort is not wasted.
  The falcons need to flush their prey into the open.
  And Manhattan is surrounded by water.
  Out here the odds change.
  And in the peregrine's favour.
  (CHURCH BELL TOLLING)  With abundant prey here all year round,  it has taken only 40 years  for these falcons to establish themselves here.
  And now, among skyscrapers, they're more successful  than their cousins living in the wilderness.
  Mumbai, in India, is home to over 20 million people.
  And there are predators here  that, though rarely seen, are rightly feared.
  Carnivores,  lured by the prospect of plentiful unsuspecting prey  are on the prowl.
  (DOG BARKING)  - (SNARLING) - A leopard.
  Every night, under the cover of darkness they come out to hunt.
  (MUSIC PLAYING OVER SPEAKERS)  These are big animals,  and they're looking for large prey to satisfy their hunger.
  To catch more than a glimpse of them and reveal their hunting behaviour,  you need night-vision cameras.
  - (INDISTINCT CHATTER) - (HORNS HONKING IN THE DISTANCE)  Leopards have attacked almost 200 people here  in the last 25 years.
  But humans are not their usual prey.
  These leopards are on the hunt for something else.
  (INDISTINCT CHATTERING)  (SNORTING)  Pigs.
  These leopards prefer to hunt the domestic animals  that people have brought to the city in considerable numbers.
  (SNORTING)  The pigs keep their family close.
  (PIG SQUEALING)  (PIGLET SQUEALING)  The ceaseless noise of the city plays to their advantage.
  It conceals their approach.
  And the leopards are using this cover to hunt all over the city.
  (PIGS SQUEALING)  This is a thriving population.
  In fact, the highest concentration of leopards in the world  is right here.
  (CHURCH BELLS TOLLING)  It's not only the abundance of food that attracts wild animals to cities.
  They're usually several degrees warmer than the surrounding countryside.
  And here in Rome, in December,  one animal is taking full advantage of this extra heat.
  And it's leaving it's mark.
  In a single winter's day,  ten tonnes of its droppings rain down on the city.
  (HORNS HONKING)  (SQUEALING)  Starlings.
  In the evening, they come back to the warmth of the city  after feeding in the neighbouring countryside.
  They must return to their roosting trees.
  But the first to do so are at the highest risk  of being caught by birds of prey.
  So, they wait for others to arrive.
  There's safety in numbers.
  As daylight fades, the sky fills with a staggering one million starlings.
  And then follows one of nature's great spectaculars.
  (WHOOSHING)  How, or indeed why, they perform these marvellous aerobatics,  we still do not fully understand.
  Eventually, en masse, they brave the descent  and fill the branches of their favourite trees.
  On these cold winter nights, the city's extra warmth  can mean the difference between life and death.
  (CHIRPING)  A city, of course, can provide  not only shelter and abundant food, but glamour.
  These varied objects have been carefully chosen  by a bird for their brightness and their colour.
  (TWIG SNAPS)  This great bowerbird has spent over a decade  building this collection of mostly man-made objects.
  Out on a golf course in Townsville, Australia,  he's putting the final touches to his enormous bower,  that he hopes will impress a visiting female.
  He spends two hours each day rearranging his prized objects.
  "Perhaps that would look a little better over there.
"  But it seems that something is missing.
  Instead of going into town to collect new objects,  he's decided to raid his neighbour's bower.
  "A clothes peg! Excellent!"  "And a shiny toy car.
"  It's a risky game if you get caught.
  The owner is back.
  (SCREECHING)  There is one bower where the risk is worth it.
  A particular object has caught his eye.
  He'll have to wait for the owner to leave.
  This is his chance.
  A real treasure.
  A scarlet heart.
  "Got it.
"  The stage is now set for female visitors.
  His luck may be in.
  The seduction can now begin.
  (SCREECHES)  He's showing off his best goods.
  "Perhaps a little plastic piping?  "Or maybe a bit of coloured string?"  But his guest doesn't seem to be paying much attention.
  "A fork?  "Madame?"  Nothing seems to be working.
  Something is just not quite right here.
  But he still has one trick up his sleeve.
  (SCREECHES)  The scarlet heart.
  (SCREECHING)  (CONTINUES SCREECHING)  As a final thrill, he expands the pink crest  on the back of his head.
  The sign of his adulthood.
  But he's made a mistake.
  This is not a female  but a young male who hasn't yet developed that head crest.
  And he's making off with the scarlet heart.
  (HISSING AND SCREECHING)  It's not easy finding sex in the city.
  Raising a family in the city is not easy either.
  It's spring time in Toronto,  and this mother raccoon has exchanged her native treetops for rooftops.
  (DOG BARKING)  Since giving birth two months ago,  she's kept her offspring safe and warm inside a chimney.
  (CHITTERING)  Now, her young have outgrown their nursery.
  This is her first major challenge as a mother.
  The time has come to move to a new home.
  She needs to get her youngster to ground level.
  But instead of an easy climb down a tree,  she is faced with a vertical drop,  with little to cling onto.
  (SQUEALING)  Her baby's first glimpse of the urban world,  from a terrifying 30 feet up.
  This is the last of her litter to be brought down.
  Its siblings are already  - busy exploring the area.
 - (CHITTERING)  And they have much to learn.
  (WHIMPERING)  This one has fallen into a back alley and is trapped.
  (CHITTERING)  Mother comes to the rescue and demonstrates what must be done.
  (BABY RACCOON WHIMPERING)  (CHITTERING)  (BABY RACCOON YELPS)  That's the way.
  Raccoons are opportunists.
  And they're eager to explore.
  But they'll have to learn very quickly  how to get along in this strange new environment  so full of hazards.
  (DOG BARKING)  (WATER SPLASHING)  Mother comes to the rescue once more.
  Urban raccoons are now demonstrably better  at problem-solving than their country cousins.
  When the feeding opportunities are this good,  the time spent working out how to get to it  is well worth it.
  The complexity of urban life  favours the clever.
  (HORNS BLARING)  (INDISTINCT SHOUTING AND CHATTER)  But to compete with humanity during daylight hours,  takes more than just intelligence.
  It takes nerve.
  One enterprising species of monkey  has moved into the city of Jaipur in India.
  The Rhesus macaque.
  But how to get a share of all this juicy fruit?  Every morning, the troop make the same journey  through the urban jungle, just as human commuters do.
  (HORNS HONKING)  Sometimes, inevitably, there are traffic jams.
  Once they get to the market, trouble begins.
  (INDISTINCT SHOUTING AND CHATTER)  Being both intelligent and brazen  is the key to beating human beings on their home turf.
  (MAN SHOUTING REPELLENTLY)  It's daylight robbery.
  (CRICKETS CHIRPING)  There are some animals that most would consider too dangerous  to tolerate in the city.
  Spotted hyenas.
  (HYENA WHOOPING)  They're feared throughout their range.
  (SNARLS)  (HYENAS BARKING AND WHOOPING)  In the outskirts of Hara in Ethiopia,  two clans are coming face to face to battle over a prized resource.
  (WHOOPING AND YELPING)  There are about 60 hyenas in each clan.
  And they're well matched.
  After three hours of posturing back and forth,  the losers retreat  and the victors head to claim their prize.
  They have been fighting over access to the city.
  Once inside the city walls, they head for one place.
  (CHITTERING)  And they know exactly how to get there.
  (WHINING)  (GROWLS)  The ancient meat market.
  The scent of all these carcasses lies heavy in the air.
  (SNARLING)  This tradition goes back over 400 years.
  The human butchers put out the bones they don't need  and these hyenas deal with them.
  They're the only animals that can.
  No other here has such powerful bone-crushing jaws.
  (YELPING AND BARKING)  And this relationship between man and beast  has now been taken a step further.
  (MAN HOOTING)  Yousuf is calling the hyenas to his house.
  He and his forefathers, going back five generations,  have been feeding the hyenas  by hand.
  The inhabitants of this town believe that hyenas  provide another very important service.
  Eating the bad spirits that haunt the streets.
  These are wild and ferocious animals,  but once within these city walls,  they behave in a completely different way.
  Throughout the rest of Africa, spotted hyenas are feared  because they kill livestock, sometimes even children.
  (CONTINUES HOOTING)  They are perhaps the most vilified animal on our planet.
  However, here in Harar,  their relationship with people is entirely peaceful.
  (CONTINUES HOOTING)  They have won the trust of man.
  Losing its fear of humans  has enabled one animal to spread into cities everywhere,  and in huge numbers.
  (PIGEONS CHIRPING)  Pigeons are by far the most successful urban bird.
  (CHURCH BELL TOLLING)  Here, in Albi, in the south of France,  the pigeons come to the river to bathe.
  They need to preen their flight feathers,  clean off the city dust,  and cool themselves down.
  But death lies in wait.
  A predator that has taken advantage  of the very thing that has led to the pigeon's success  Their lack of fear.
  As the pigeons bathe, oil from their plumage flows downstream,  and is detected.
  A monstrous Wels catfish.
  Introduced here just 40 years ago, they have proliferated.
  Virtually exterminated the local fish stocks  And they've now developed a taste for pigeon.
  Their eyesight is poor,  so they use their barbels to sense the movements of their victims.
  This is a radical new hunting strategy  for what is normally a bottom-dwelling fish.
  After a thousand years of living in this city,  pigeons are now having to learn to avoid a fish.
  (CHURCH BELL TOLLING)  Our cities are always changing.
  Sometimes very swiftly.
  And animals must cope with the changes,  or disappear.
  One of the greatest changes in recent times  has come from a single invention made less than 140 years ago.
  Electric light.
  It has become more and more powerful,  filling our streets with light.
  It's everywhere in the city.
  It even goes under ground.
  (HORNS BLARING)  The difference between day and night is becoming less and less perceptible.
  And that has a profound effect on the activities of wildlife.
  In the wilderness, light triggers all kinds of behaviour.
  On the night of the full moon,  hundreds of tiny hawksbill turtle hatchlings  emerge from the safety of their nest deep in the sand.
  Their instinct is to reach the sea as quickly as possible.
  And their guide is the light of the full moon reflected on the water.
  But this young hatchling is confused.
  It's going in the wrong direction.
  Bright light is coming from the land.
  And all these hatchlings are travelling up the beach towards it.
  (INDISTINCT SHOUTING)  Predators are ready to take advantage.
  Crabs now make their burrows directly beneath the beach lights  and wait for their prey to come to them.
  Even if a hatchling escapes,  they're still in peril.
  (VEHICLES PASSING)  The lights become more and more bewildering.
  80% of all hatchlings on this beach  are now disorientated by the lights of the town.
  Roads bring many to their end.
  Hundreds get trapped in storm drains every night.
  Exhausted by the effort of travelling such a distance on land,  this hatchling's chances of surviving the night are slim.
  This turtle is one of the countless species  that have been unable to adapt to the change  brought about by the urban environment.
  Only a small number of animals  have managed to find ways of living alongside us.
  And every 10 years, an area the size of Britain  disappears under a jungle of concrete.
  But it doesn't have to be like this.
  Could it not be possible to build cities more in harmony with nature?  How, and whether we decide to invite the wildlife back, is up to us.
  This tree is rising nearly 30 storeys.
  It's one of almost 800 being planted to create a vertical forest in Milan.
  This number of living trees would normally fill two hectares of woodland,  but here, they occupy one-tenth of that area.
  Greening the walls and roofs of our buildings  could create a rich and extensive habitat,  if we wanted it to do so.
  There is one city where that idea is being applied on a major scale.
  Singapore.
  Two million trees have been planted here in the last 45 years.
  (BIRDS CHIRPING)  This city is now richer in species than any other in the world.
  And this practise extends to all parts of the city.
  The waterways have been cleaned up,  and smooth-coated otters are coming back.
  But perhaps, the most spectacular example of city greening  is this grove of super trees.
  These 150 feet high metal structures are now full of life.
  Creepers have been planted to grow over the outermost branches.
  This is a new urban world that we have now designed and built  with others in mind.
  Create the space, and the animals will come.
  Is this a vision of our cities of the future?  It could be possible to see wildlife thriving  within our cities across the planet.
  We, after all, are the architects of the urban world.
  Now, over half of us live in an urban environment.
  My home, too, is here in the city of London.
  Looking down on this great metropolis,  the ingenuity with which we continue  to reshape the surface of our planet is very striking,  but it's also sobering.
  It reminds me of just how easy it is for us  to lose our connection with the natural world.
  Yet it's on this connection that the future  of both humanity and the natural world will depend.
  It's surely our responsibility to do everything within our power  to create a planet that provides a home not just for us,  but for all life on Earth.
  For a wildlife film crew,  working in the urban environment was an altogether different experience.
  Two crews set off on two very different missions.
  It's Mark and Louis's first time in India.
  Passed this moped, and we're not stopping.
  We're going.
 Oh, my God!  Yeah, we're in India.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Along with the rest of the team,  they hope to film up close and personal  with the monkeys that have come from the wild  to live in the hustle and bustle of the city.
  I can't believe these macaques have left the peace and quiet  for this mayhem, but they're fine here.
  In fact, they're probably a bit more comfortable than I am with this noise.
  - (CAR HORN HONKING) - Yeah, yeah.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And to get into the monkey's world,  Mark will be using a new rig that stabilises the camera  and allows him to get right into the action.
  I think Mark and Louis have got a big challenge.
  To be, uh, wielding thousands of pounds worth of camera equipment  down at the street level.
  (LAUGHS) Rather them than me.
  LOUIS: We've got a lady with cauliflowers  passing on your left, Mark.
  - MARK: Just pull me aside.
 - On your left.
  I'm more used to a jungle, if I'm honest.
  Erm, well, this is a jungle all of its own.
  Just with people instead of trees.
  (LAUGHING) This really It's impossible.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Seven hundred miles south, in Mumbai,  cameraman Gordon Buchanan will have to take on  a completely different filming approach  if he is to capture an urban leopard hunt.
  (GOAT BLEATING)  It's amazing to think that standing here, surrounded by people,  all this, kind of, human activity,  that within half a mile,  maybe even less, there will be leopards.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Only glimpses of these cats have been caught on camera,  and just to locate them,  he'll need new infrared camera traps.
  Are you happy with the composition? Good.
  What about you? Correct shutter speed?  (LAUGHING)  Gordon is hoping that these camera traps will reveal where they're on the prowl.
  For the monkey team, finding the animals seems easy  MARK: Steady now, Rob.
 Rob, Rob, Rob.
  but keeping up with them is a different matter.
  - He almost stomped on that.
 - Ooh!  They didn't put that on the hazard assessment.
  - WOMAN: They did, as a matter of fact.
 - A cow in the groin?  - WOMAN: A cow in the groin in there.
 - (LAUGHS)  MARK: They're much tougher and more granitey  than the monkeys I filmed in the wild.
  They're not frightened of us.
  They're, erm I mean, look at this.
  (PIG SQUEALS)  He's takin' on pigs, he's takin' on goats,  he's takin' on cows.
  He's takin' on me anytime he wants to.
  ATTENBOROUGH: But with monkeys this brazen,  Mark is able to follow the troop at street level.
  (MACAQUES SCREECHING)  ATTENBOROUGH: To capture their movements in their rooftop world,  they need to run a cable between buildings and fly a camera along it.
  And that calls for some inventive rigging.
  I've got this soft satsuma here,  and I've got to lob it to the team on the other side, over there.
  We're gonna lob it from rooftop to rooftop.
  We've made sure there's no one on the rooftops and it's safe to do it.
  You ready?  Okay.
  Okay, good.
 That's good.
  I got it into the courtyard.
 So that's perfect.
  I think our cable run at the moment is about 60 metres.
  And we can travel the whole length,  while panning and tilting and really looking at everything we want to.
  It should give us some really dynamic stunning shots.
  ATTENBOROUGH: The team is getting an insight at all levels  into the monkeys' mischievous lives.
  (MONKEY SHRIEKING)  And are starting to figure out the routes they use to cross the city.
  And over the course of weeks,  the macaques become all too familiar with the crew.
  MARK: (CHUCKLING) Oh, monkey.
  All right, little monkey.
 All right.
  ATTENBOROUGH: They're now fully embedded in the troop,  and Mark is able to film right amongst them.
  LOUIS: These guys at the moment are magic.
  We've got monkeys behaving naturally.
  It's fantastic.
  MARK: It's good, Louis.
 LOUIS: Very nice, too.
 Very nice.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Back in Mumbai, the camera traps are revealing  where the leopards are coming out.
  But to stand any chance of capturing them hunting in the city,  Gordon will need to use the latest thermal camera technology.
  (DRUMMING AND TRUMPETING)  (FIRE CRACKER EXPLODES)  (WHISPERING) I can't imagine that a leopard's gonna come  with all this going on.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Relative silence eventually descends.
  Okay, I picked up some movement behind some bushes on the camera.
  Just a, sort of, a twinkling of light.
  It's something warm-blooded.
  Here we go.
  A leopard.
  You dancer, look at that.
  It definitely knows that I'm here.
  That's the type of sighting that you'd have to wait for weeks and weeks  to get a leopard that close,  and so airily open.
  ATTENBOROUGH: Over the next month,  this camera enables Gordon to see into the darkness,  and be the first person to film an urban leopard hunt.
  But it's only at the end of the trip  that he has his most memorable encounter.
  BUCHANAN: Look at the size of him.
  He's coming up.
 He's coming up.
 He's coming up.
  My goodness! Look at that.
  He's about three metres in front of me.
  Hey, there!  (SMACKS LIPS)  My heart is racing.
  That was close.
  That's the closest I've ever been to a leopard.
  It's often the case with urban wildlife  is that it's the presence of human beings  that allows certain animals to do well.
  And I suppose it's just incredible  that one of those animals is the leopard.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It isn't just Gordon getting an insight  into the surprising wildlife encounters possible in the city.
  It's in Jodhpur, filming the langurs,  that the monkey team really see the extraordinary relationship  between humans and animals in Indian cities.
  They're so tolerant.
 They're amazing.
  ATTENBOROUGH: And it makes a strong impression on them.
  Oh, it's beautiful!  Yeah, that is beautiful.
  MARK: I mean, coming to India, this is what you realise  that if you let your wildlife into the city  and you really embrace it, then this is the reward you get.
  I mean, this phenomenal connection  with incredible creatures, and that just feels wonderful.
  ATTENBOROUGH: It was a surprising revelation  that it was in cities where the film crews  had some of their most extraordinary encounters with wild animals.
  OCR and corrections by explosiveskull     
                    The family is one of the most powerful forces in nature.
  Family life is full of wonder  Beauty  And drama.
  For the past four years,  we've been following some of the most celebrated and endangered species  on Earth.
  We follow their fortunes from here on the plains of Zimbabwe,  to the jungles of India.
  From the edge of the Sahara,  to the frozen wastes of Antarctica.
  We join each family at a crucial moment in their lives  when they're battling against the odds.
  Fighting for survival  against the elements,  and against rivals.
  We've got closer and filmed in greater length  and in more detail than we've ever tried to do before.
  In our modern world,  ensuring the survival of the next generation  is becoming ever more difficult.
  For these families, to win against the odds  will be their greatest challenge.
  This is Dynasties.
  Senegal, West Africa.
  Home to a remarkable troop of chimpanzees.
  It gets so hot and dry here,  it's the very limit of where they can survive.
  This territory is ruled by one strong and determined leader.
  An alpha male known as David.
  His rule gets him the best of everything.
  But he can trust no one.
  He's surrounded by rivals prepared to kill him  for his crown.
  This is a story of power,  politics,  and the fight for survival.
  David's torn ears are testament to the many battles he's fought  and won to protect his status  and his family.
  He has ruled over his troop for three years.
  Leaders here don't usually hold power for much longer than this  and now as the dry season begins,  David's rivals are gathering again.
  Successful alpha males normally have many allies to support them.
  But David is alone.
  He has never been more vulnerable.
  In the dry season, these huge mounds of Earth  are magnets for all 32 chimps in the group.
  The mounds are full of food.
  Rich in fat and protein  Termites.
  These chimps have learned to use grass stems as tools  to fish out the insects.
  As leader, David gets his pick of the feeding spots.
  But he is wary  as he must feed alongside old enemies.
  He has two particularly ambitious rivals.
  David's toes begin to twitch.
  A nervous tic he can't conceal.
  This is Jumkin  who has long sought the top spot.
  And this, Luthor.
  A tempestuous younger male  with an aggressive streak.
  The troop is together for the first time in months  and jostling for good feeding spots can easily lead to clashes.
  It's vital that David keeps order and defuses the situation.
  All eyes are on him.
  His display shows he is in control.
  But in chimp society,  strength alone is not enough.
  David must be political to hold on to power.
  He needs to make an ally.
  This is K.
L.
  He's strong but grey-bearded and past the age  where he would challenge for the role of alpha.
  David makes an approach.
  Grooming builds bonds of friendship.
  Buying support and giving benefits in return.
  You scratch my back and I'll scratch yours.
  Only time will tell if this new alliance will pay off.
  Temperatures soar.
  It's already 40 degrees.
  The arid land might seem one giant sand pit  for the infants.
  But for the adults,  existing tensions are starting to surface.
  And David has his eye on Jumkin.
  Jumkin attacks an elderly female.
  It's a display of his aspirations for power.
  David can't tolerate this,  but K.
L.
 steps in.
  And gives Jumkin a sharp lesson.
  It's swiftly followed by one from David himself.
  With a final huge lunge at his rival,  Jumkin comes crashing down.
  Together, David and KL.
 are now a force to be reckoned with.
  Fires destroy three-quarters of the group's territory.
  Much of their food and shelter has gone.
  And with temperatures continuing to rise,  water is becoming perilously scarce.
  The group must stick together to survive.
  Gathering in a dried-out river bed,  they use knowledge passed down from generation to generation.
  A hidden water source  under the parched earth.
  For David, there is more than just drought to worry about.
  He can't avoid his rivals.
  K.
L.
 is proving to be a loyal ally to David.
  And David is going to need him more than ever.
  By rare coincidence,  three of the seven females have become sexually receptive,  at the same time.
  Their swellings attract the attention of all the males.
  The females will try to mate with as many males as possible.
  David must control them all  to ensure that he is the one who mates.
  But some of the troop, like Luthor, have other ideas.
  All the other males see this could be their chance.
  There has never been a more important moment  for David to assert his power.
  He makes the first move.
  His rivals respond with their own display of strength  and start to close ranks.
  David and K.
L.
 seem to be outnumbered.
  Everything turns to chaos.
  At some point during the night the younger males turned on David.
  The females and their infants come to his side.
  To support him and tend his wounds.
  They can't stay here.
  They and their young need water.
  The whole group move on to the nearest water hole.
  Even K.
L.
 has to leave David behind.
  It's a six-mile trek to the next source of water.
  David is left for dead.
  There is now a power vacuum at the top  and Luthor sees an opportunity.
  Creating fear within the group is one way to become leader.
  He tries to intimidate the group.
  But a bid for leadership is never instant.
  He'll have to keep this up for many days.
  Friendless and wounded,  David somehow musters the energy  to search for food.
  He has to rejoin the group before he's exiled for good.
  But first he must regain strength.
  Time is running out.
  Remarkably, one week after the attack,  David makes the long journey to find the group.
  Luthor, meanwhile, has ramped up his bid for leadership.
  David has almost made it.
  But he's in no fit state to fight.
  Luthor spots David's approach.
  And readies himself for battle.
  David's only chance against Luthor  is to make himself look as strong as possible.
  Intimidated, Luthor has to run.
  Without a blow being struck, David is back.
  David is finally reunited with his comrade K.
L.
  Grooming each other reaffirms their bonds of friendship.
  For David, returning is only half the battle.
  Exhausted and fragile,  he's only hanging on to his leadership by a thread.
  Luthor appears defeated.
  With a submissive gesture,  he seeks forgiveness from David.
  But David is unwilling to accept.
  Over the following weeks, Luthor finds himself sidelined.
  The other males now gather round David.
  And Luthor has no choice but to step in line.
  David has his group around him once more.
  But he doesn't show them how weakened he really is.
  His injuries haven't healed  and the males could turn on him again at any moment.
  For now, he seems to be fooling them all.
  He's buying himself time to regain his strength,  before another female comes into season,  when he will face competition once again.
  At last, rain filled clouds bring an end to the drought.
  David's territory is transformed.
  There is water everywhere, and a glut of food.
  The pressure on the group is lifted.
  Everyone can relax a little after months of hardship.
  David's strength appears to be returning.
  His displays in front of the group become ever more assertive.
  But in truth, he remains weaker than he lets on to the others.
  Whenever possible, he disappears to gather extra food.
  He gorges on everything he can find.
  Fruit  Leaves  Even ants.
  He's almost back to full health.
  But that alone might still not be enough for him to hold on to power.
  Soon, another female will be ready to mate.
  Last time, one ally was not enough for David.
  He tries a new strategy.
  He starts grooming other males.
  First one  Then another.
  Slowly over weeks,  he surrounds himself with a band of allies.
  An army of elders.
  Experienced fighters, but too old to steal his crown.
  Now he must wait and see if he's done enough  to prevent a recurrence of dissent in the ranks.
  Sure enough, a female has come into season.
  Her swelling doesn't go unnoticed.
  Last time, David was vulnerable.
  This time, he has allies  prepared to charge ahead and clear his path.
  Displaying his strength reminds rivals to stay away.
  If David has fully secured his position as alpha,  he will be the one who mates with the female.
  She catches his eye.
  With a number of allies positioned throughout the group,  none of his rivals dare to challenge him.
  This is David's time to mate.
  Nine months later,  a new baby boy.
  David's reward for maintaining power.
  His rule and the future of his dynasty is secure.
  By being alpha, David will have sired twice as many offspring  as any other member of the group.
  And one day, one of his sons  might just have what it takes to be a future leader.
  David has become the most powerful, longest reigning alpha  this group has ever seen.
  But there will always be another dry season.
  And there will always be rivals waiting for their chance.
  The Dynasties crew has spent two years capturing  the story of these chimpanzees.
  This  is how every day begins.
  Walking over 7,500 miles.
  You know it's steep when the chimp is being careful.
  Carrying around 80 kilos each day.
  In some of the hottest temperatures on Earth.
  It's got to be 46, 47 degrees right now.
  I think it's fair to say,  filming a blazing fire when it's 40 degrees  wasn't probably my best idea.
  This is crazy,  this is the second time we've had to run away from bees this morning.
  I got stung and as you might be able to tell,  it's swollen up a little bit.
  They bite hard.
  How stuck is it?  It's pretty stuck.
  But the hardest challenge of all is understanding the complexities  of the lives of these chimps.
  This is only possible thanks to scientists Jill Pruetz  and her team who have been studying this troop for nearly 20 years.
  One of the reasons I think I like to have people see the chimps  is that it is almost like a soap opera.
  It really is this,  this social group that is not that different from humans  and so you have relationships change and you have different personalities.
  Jill's insights help the team to get to know  all the different characters she has given names to over the years.
  But right from the start, one chimp named David  grabs everyone's attention.
  We've only been here a few days,  but immediately David stood out.
  He's really recognisable.
  He's a bit of a game player, but, also, he's often on his own.
  He's very, very charismatic.
  He's got a real kind of swagger to him, reminds me of Marlon Brando.
  Just that he's got this real kind of presence to him.
  David's one of my favourite chimps,  so I may be a little biased, I think he's quite clever.
  I think of him as a very strong-willed chimp,  a very dominant chimp,  and he was very ambitious when he first became a young adult,  and he rose up the hierarchy really quickly for his age.
  So he became alpha, actually, when he was a teenager.
  He's constantly having to fend off challenges  from other younger males.
  But it just goes to show it's tough being alpha.
  It's tough being at the top.
  After following David for so many months,  he seems almost like family to the crew.
  So when he's violently attacked, it's a real shock.
  Coming out this morning, it's sort of heart breaking  to see this  Chimp that was so powerful just looking so weak.
  Oh, he doesn't look good, he's covered in flies.
  And he's looking really bad actually.
  He looks like a frail old man suddenly.
  Like he  Like he's ready to die almost.
  The following day, their concerns deepen.
  We arrived at 5:00 this morning.
  We've not been able to find any of the chimps.
  So we've got no idea what condition David's in  and he's in a bad way already.
  Need some luck.
  Sort of worried about him in his state.
  Um, I just really hope he's okay.
  We're still looking.
  They check the remote camera at the water hole  where they hope David might have gone to drink.
  So I've just gone from the beginning.
  And, um, it looks like David hasn't been to drink here.
  Michel has just found some tracks, how he finds these things I don't know,  but there's a chance we might catch up with him.
  It's a good sign, let's go.
  Luckily the tracks do indeed lead to David.
  We've been really worried with the extent of his injuries.
  We didn't know if he was alive or if he was ever coming back.
  He came right back in and maintained that alpha status.
  David has been alpha for almost double what we've seen with  the other alphas.
  He's been challenged a few times but he's been able to hold on.
  We saw him  not only nearly lose his position in the hierarchy, but we saw him  nearly lose his life.
  The injuries he sustained  in the last coup would've been enough to kill me.
  David has been able to overcome the many challenges  that have come from within.
  But there's a greater threat that he and his group face.
  In Senegal right now, I'd say the main threat to chimpanzees  is the gold rush which just obliterates huge areas.
  Less than a decade ago, the prices of gold rose  and people have intensified gold mining  and so that really has increased the number of people here.
  Chimps here have lived alongside people for thousands of years.
  David's group has, so far, adapted to life alongside humans  in a remarkable way.
  But with such demand for these minerals  and ever more people searching for gold in this region,  habitat destruction and poaching is inevitable.
  You know, there's not that many chimpanzees left.
  The West African chimp here in Senegal  and in West Africa, in general, has been upgraded to critically endangered  because so many have been lost.
  In Senegal, the number of chimpanzees is now just in the hundreds.
  In the last 25 years,  80% of Western Chimpanzees have disappeared.
  And in the future, studies like Jill's will become increasingly important  to help conservationists and local governments  protect the surviving chimpanzees,  not only in Senegal, but across the whole of Africa.
  Next time, a dynasty of thousands.
  A great march into the frozen wastes  of Antarctica.
  To face the coldest and cruellest winter on Earth.
 
                    Autumn in Atka Bay,  Antarctica.
  Just a few weeks ago, this was open sea.
  Now a new, frozen landscape is forming.
  This new world appears devoid of live.
  Well, almost.
  An emperor penguin.
  And he is not alone.
  Thousands of emperors are coming to this frozen bay.
  They are here because the new ice  provides the safest place for them to breed.
  The ice will last nine months before melting away next summer.
  And they will need every day of those nine months to raise  the next generation for this great emperor dynasty.
  But to do so, they will have to survive the coming winter,  the coldest and the cruellest  on earth.
  Emperors pair up anew every year  and although winter is fast approaching  the process of finding the perfect partner  cannot be hurried.
  New couples perform a graceful ritual  that will cement their commitment to each other.
  Moving together in synchrony  is the key to creating a powerful bond.
  And this bond needs to be one of the strongest in nature.
  Because the survival of every family here  and, therefore, the survival of this dynasty depends upon it.
  A penguin is beautifully designed for many things  but mating is not one of them.
  Unfortunately, not all the penguins  have been able to find a perfect partner.
  And with time fast running out,  this female foregoes the formalities.
  But this couple has already bonded too tightly  to be split apart by an interloper.
  Penguins unlucky in love  head back to spend the winter feeding at sea,  because there's no food out here on the ice.
  The couples now face weeks of waiting  while their eggs develop.
  But one pair appears to have got ahead of schedule.
  A bulge on a penguin's belly is normally the sign  of a parent keeping an egg warm on its feet.
  But she seems to be trying to keep  a snow ball warm.
  They appear to be getting some practice for the real thing.
  The days are becoming shorter and colder.
  Until finally  the sun sets for the last time for two months.
  It won't rise again until the spring.
  Now they live in a twilight world,  under the bright Antarctic moon.
  For this couple the long wait for their egg is almost over.
  The female senses it.
  Her contractions have begun.
  The next generation of emperors is on its way.
  Producing an egg takes a huge amount of energy  such, that the females lose  a quarter of their body weight.
  She hasn't eaten for over a month  and needs to return to the ocean to feed.
  She can't take her precious egg with her  so she must pass it to her partner to care for.
  He has a special brood pouch  to keep it warm close to his skin.
  If he doesn't get the egg off the ice quickly, it will freeze.
  Now she is free to go.
  But she does seem rather reluctant to leave.
  He will now have sole responsibility for the egg  all through the long, harsh winter.
  He won't see his partner again until the egg has hatched.
  Over the next few days every female in the colony  hurries away on the same 50-mile march to the sea (20 km).
  A freezing wind blowing in from the heart of the continent  drives the temperature down.
  To keep their eggs and themselves warm,  the males now perform  one of the most spectacular demonstrations of cooperation in nature.
  One by one,  they lock themselves into a huddle,  creating a giant incubator  made up of over four thousand male penguins.
  Each individual constantly tries to push  into the best possible position to keep himself  and his egg warm.
  As a result, the entire huddle is forever on the move.
  Storm-force winds now drive the temperature down  to minus 60 Celsius.
  For the emperors on the outside facing the wind,  the conditions become unbearable.
  They have no choice but to break off  and try to get round to the sheltered side.
  He must get back on his feet, but without letting go of his egg.
  If he fails, the embryo inside will rapidly freeze and die.
  Once they arrive on the sheltered side of the huddle,  they get some relief from the wind.
  When the blizzard sets in here,  it rages for days on end.
  Now the casualties are revealed.
  Battered, starving and exhausted,  there is still no relief for the survivors.
  The storm has driven them nearly a mile (1.
6 km)  from the safest part of the ice.
  It's a weary march back to where they started from.
  Now they re-form their huddle,  to be ready for the next storm.
  Which will come inevitably.
  Only after two months of brutal weather  Does the polar night finally come to an end.
  And with it comes a hint of warmth.
  The return of the sun coincides with the appearance  of the newest members of the colony.
  I a matter of days there are thousands of hungry mouths  all demanding food.
  Their fathers haven't eaten anything for nearly four months.
  Yet they have kept back a vital reserve  penguin milk just for this moment.
  But it's only enough  to keep the chick alive for a few days.
  The females must return soon with food.
  For some, it's already too late.
  The first of the females are returning.
  Fat and well-fed, more arrive  all with food for the chicks.
  And not a moment too soon for the waiting fathers.
  A mother's first sight of their young chick.
  With their bond reaffirmed, the whole family celebrates.
  Now, at last, he can hand over his precious chick to its mother.
  But there are less fortunate females here, whose chicks have died.
  Yet their parenting instinct is still strong.
  The sight of a youngster being handed over is irresistible.
  More chickless females join in the melee.
  The chick appears to be safe.
  But it is no longer with its true parents.
  The prospects for a kidnapped chick are never good.
  Despite their immense efforts over the last three months,  this couple have nothing to show for it.
  For those couples that have been successful,  it's the father's turn to head back to sea  to get a much needed meal for himself  and to take his turn collecting food for the chick.
  The mother is now able to bond with her new baby.
  And urgently to feed it.
  Its first taste of seafood.
  But the times of hardship are not over.
  Another storm and another white-out.
  For some, this is a catastrophe.
  They have tumbled into a ravine in the ice,  with steep, slippery walls.
  Chicks are now a deadly burden,  mothers carrying young cannot grip the ice.
  If she doesn't get out, they will both die.
  This mother has had to make a terrible choice,  to save herself, she has abandoned her chick.
  One mother, at least, is not prepared to give up on her chick.
  Mother and chick are safe.
  There is, occasionally,  a respite from the brutality of Antarctica.
  Clear skies, gentle winds  and a particularly spectacular display  of the southern lights,  the aurora australis.
  As the sun climbs higher every day,  it warms the ice.
  Soon the emperors' frozen world  will start to melt away.
  For the last few weeks, the mother and father  have taken it in turn to feed their offspring,  but its growing appetite will soon force both parents  to go away fishing at the same time.
  Now it's time to encourage the month-old chicks  to stand on their own two feet.
  Sometimes it takes a well-timed kick.
  Now both parents can head off to sea to go fishing.
  For the first time the chicks will have to face  the elements without a parent to protect them.
  Other adults certainly won't look after them.
  So lone chicks  gather together for comfort.
  As the temperature drops  to minus 25, the chicks instinctively  create their own mini huddle,  just as their fathers do.
  This is no time for a youngster to be alone.
  if they're lucky, some chicks may still  have the protection of a parent  taking a break from fishing.
  But for the majority, the huddle is their only shelter.
  Even in this weather, adults must still head back  to the sea to bring back food.
  The instinct to follow adults is still strong.
  but in a blizzard that is a bad idea.
  The adults' disappearance  leaves the chicks in confusion.
  Lost and alone, his only hope  is that this adult is heading back to the colony  and not away from it across the frozen wastes.
  With the last of the big storms over,  summer has arrived.
  The ice that has been the penguins' home is melting.
  These chicks are almost fully grown  and approaching independence.
  Before they leave for the sea, all emperors  adults and their chicks must moult.
  For the youngsters, this marks the arrival of adulthood.
  Against all the odds two thirds have survived.
  But the annual disappearance of their ice world  is a reminder that they face an uncertain future.
  Ocean temperatures are expected to rise year on year.
  This Antarctic sea ice,  on which all emperor penguins rely,  may not freeze for long enough each year  for them to complete their extraordinary life cycle.
  But as the whole colony prepares to leave Atka Bay,  these parents have successfully raised  the next generation  in this emperors' dynasty.
  To capture the extraordinary story of emperor penguins,  the Dynasties team had to travel to the end of the earth.
  Neumayer research station will be home  to the film crew for nearly a year.
  About 70 tons worth of food.
  Got about 15 boxes of white cabbage.
  Neumayer has everything they need.
  But it's a different world outside.
  It's really easy to feel quite comfortable inside and  this place is  wild, really wild.
  It's worth reminding every now and again.
  Inside!  The crew need five layers of clothing  before they can even think of leaving the base.
  As the final plane departs they know that  it will be the last till winter is over in eight months' time.
  The plane just left and that's us on our own now.
  Nobody will be coming in case something happened.
  We're now all by ourselves.
  When the team head out to explore they discover  just how careful they have to be working in this hostile world.
  We've got across an enormous crack  so we're probably on an unsafe piece of ice at the moment.
  Oh my God!  Did you just hear that?  A deep crack at the edge of the ice shelf like this  can be extremely dangerous.
  Oh my word, it just goes straight down.
  This area is definitely not safe.
  Incredible reminder of how  unpredictable this place is.
  It's just mind-blowing.
  Six miles from the station (9.
6 km), permanent ice meets the ocean.
  This is where the penguins will soon be heading.
  Once the sea is frozen, the team will have to cross  the treacherous, newly-formed ice to reach them.
  Found a decent spot for the big guys to lower me down onto the sea ice for the first time.
  Will can act as a bit of a safety man for me  in case something goes wrong.
  These are our first three steps onto the sea ice.
  Definitely it is a bit nerve-wrecking  knowing that there's a couple of hundred metres of water underneath us.
  To find a safe route the crew must check  the depth of the ice all the way.
  Ice around 30 cm and above is stable.
  This is a great moment for us.
  We've finally made it to the colony.
  Yes, very special.
  When it's this still, and there's this many birds in front of you,  and  makes the place look absolutely beautiful.
  A few weeks later the sun sets for the last time,  and Antarctica reveals its harsher side.
  We think it's probably minus 50.
  The sun is somewhere below the horizon.
  So won't be visible for another  six weeks, probably.
  So this is something we're gonna have to get used to.
  It's easier said than done.
  Oh, God!  Then the storms come.
  A proper, proper weather now and really, really strong winds.
  The colony is just in front of us.
  Sometimes it disappears behind the snow.
  It's been hovering around 100 km/h, and since has picked up.
  What these penguins are having to put up with out there is just mind-blowing.
  Finally we're coming to the end of this storm.
  There's all sorts of weird rattling sounds and  God honest, I don't know how this station manages to stay standing.
  Finally, the sun returns, but the storms continue.
  A break in the weather reveals something the team had not expected.
  I can hear a heck of a lot of noise coming from just over the brow.
  Oh man!  Oh, my word!  There are birds down there with chicks.
  Film crews have to capture events as they unfold  whatever their feelings.
  I know it's natural, but it's  bloody hard to watch.
  We're just gonna have to observe them for a bit and see exactly what's happening.
  We've climbed back onto the top because the weather  is coming in again and we're just gonna have to pack up  and an adult with a chick on its feet  managed to make its way up.
  Amazing, he's using its beak, and when he got to this last little leg  its wings!  Oh, man, if only the other 50 in there could do the same.
  Hopefully the weather will clear again tomorrow, we can get back down here  and fingers crossed, there will be a few less birds in this hole.
  Two days later the weather allows the team to return to the colony.
  Already the gully has claimed more casualties.
  The team decide to act.
  We've given it a lot of thought.
  We've decided that we're definitely gonna dig a shallow ramp  that they will hopefully use.
  It's very rare for a film crew to intervene.
  But they realise that they may be able to save at least some  of these birds simply by digging a few steps in the ice.
  Oh, man! Will, look!  Oh, my goodness.
  We were literally just about to leave, but  the first birds are definitely making their way up, which is brilliant.
  So hopefully they'll just make their way back to the colony  and them and their chicks'll have a much better chance of survival  because there is no chance  that they were gonna survive down there at all.
  The crew follow the chicks as they grow up  and after months with the emperors  their time in Antarctica is finally coming to a close.
  We're coming to the end of the trip now.
  Yeah, we've had a  had an amazing year, and  I'm obviously desperate to get home.
  But this  there's an odd part of me that doesn't wanna leave.
  What a privilege, eh?  Next time  A lioness battles against the odds  to protect her family.
  Can she lead them back from the brink of disaster?     
                    Lions are the very image of majesty.
  And indeed, of Africa itself.
  Their strength lies in the power of the pride.
  They're a tight-knit family.
  Lions have ruled the Savannas for millennia.
  And yet, within the last 20 years or so,  the numbers have fallen by almost half.
  Our team has spent two years  following perhaps the most famous lion family of all.
  The Marsh Pride of Kenya's Maasai Mara.
  As we join them, the very survival of this great dynasty is under threat.
  Their future depends entirely on the strength and determination  of one extraordinary leader.
  Perhaps the most powerful in the history of the Marsh Pride.
  A lioness known as Charm.
  The Maasai Mara.
  The pride have always thrived here,  through an alliance between powerful alpha males to protect the family,  and experienced females to raise the cubs.
  But for the first time in the pride's history,  this alliance has been shattered.
  The family has been abandoned by all the adult males.
  The survival of the pride now rests upon the shoulders of Charm  and her cousin Siena,  the only remaining adults.
  If their young are to reach adulthood,  and the dynasty return to full strength,  they must now both protect and feed the whole family.
  August.
  Following the recent rains, it's a time of plenty.
  The lions are surrounded by Wildebeest on their annual migration.
  A quarter-tonne bull would make a good meal for all 10 of the pride.
  But even though Charm is an experienced hunter,  most attempts end in failure.
  Charm uses her hind legs to knock the Wildebeest off balance.
  The smallest cubs won't be able to catch food  for themselves for another 12 months.
  Their ever-growing appetites mean that  Charm and Siena have to hunt around the clock.
  The females are often forced to head out alone.
  Tonight, it's Siena's turn.
  Sunrise.
  Siena is seriously injured.
  She's too weak to move.
  A [one [ion is a!ways at risk of attack 17 y buffalo, hyenas,  even other lion prides.
  It's evening.
  And Siena hasn't returned to her family.
  Now, everything depends on Charm.
  As night falls, Charm has no choice but to head out to hunt,  leaving the vulnerable cubs alone.
  She's being trailed.
  Hyenas.
  They'll attack the lions if they get a chance  to steal any kill they make.
  Charm must work fast before they find her.
  They've tracked her down.
  On her own, she couldn't hold them off.
  But another of the pride has been following Charm.
  Her three-year-old daughter, Yaya.
  The rest of the pride arrive to eat.
  Yaya has stepped up to help defend the pride  and feed her family.
  Daughters stay with their mothers for life,  and may eventually have cubs of their own.
  Yaya is not yet an adult,  but as Charm's eldest daughter, she's next in line to lead the pride.
  Charm also has a three-year-old son, Tatu.
  The beginnings of an impressive mane  are a sign of his approaching adulthood.
  Like every adolescent,  Tatu can't resist the chance to test his growing strength.
  Even against a two-tonne hippo.
  But he's not the only young male in this pride.
  His cousin, Red.
  Over the last few months, the two of them  have begun to forge an alliance.
  But even together, they're not really going to worry an angry hippo.
  Unlike their sisters, sons always leave their family  when they reach adulthood.
  Their growing bond may enable them to leave as a powerful partnership.
  Eventually, they'll fight other males,  to try and take over a pride of their own.
  But for the time being,  they still need Charm to look after them.
  It's been four days since Siena was attacked.
  She's back on her feet,  but she's in urgent need of a meal.
  She simply doesn't have the strength.
  As they mature, young males begin to explore the boundaries  of the pride's territory.
  Red has ventured out alone.
  And landed straight into the middle of the hyena clan.
  He's trapped, by over 20 of them.
  The pack tries to wear him down.
  This number of hyenas could kill him.
  It's impossible to fight them all at once.
  He can't keep them at bay for much longer.
  He's tiring fast.
  His ally, Tatu, has heard the commotion.
  Now, the odds have changed.
  Even for 20 hyenas,  a pair of male lions is too much to take on.
  Red is lucky.
  Tatu has saved his cousin'5 life.
  After weeks of feeding on scraps,  Siena has grown strong enough  to try and rejoin her family.
  She greets Charm first.
  Even after being apart for so long,  the bond between them is still strong.
  Yaya also welcomes Siena back into the pride.
  At last, Charm's family are back together.
  Charm not only has her hunting partner back,  but another hunter is emerging.
  Yaya is becoming a powerful lioness.
  She's learned how to stalk.
  Stay low.
  Approach silently,  and from downwind.
  But the key to a successful ambush  is not being noticed.
  Now it's seen her, the Wildebeest with its sharp horns  has the advantage.
  But Yaya is learning.
  Mother and daughter are starting to develop their partnership.
  It's October.
  The great Wildebeest migration never stops.
  And now, they're leaving the Maasai Mara.
  For Charm and her family,  food is about to become much more difficult to find.
  The plains are empty, and in search of food,  Charm leads the pride to the edge of their range.
  Here she finds another kind of prey.
  Cattle, illegally brought into the lions' territory to graze.
  And opportunity to feed her hungry family.
  But hunting cattle can lead to disaster.
  To protect their livestock,  herdsmen sometimes put out poison bait.
  Lions can't tell when a meal is toxic.
  A week later, Charm's one-year-old son  is so ill, he can hardly stand.
  The whole pride are showing the signs of poisoning.
  And Siena is missing once again.
  As the temperature climbs, the pride heads off to find shade.
  But the struggling cub is too weak to follow.
  Charm needs to stay with the rest of the pride.
  Hours later, the cub still hasn't caught up with his mother.
  And there's no sign of Siena either.
  The next day, Charm returns to her son's side.
  He's still very unsteady.
  But his mother can't abandon the rest of the pride.
  For the sake of the pride,  Charm abandons her young cub.
  The others are waiting for her.
  They need her now, more than ever.
  She will never see her son, or Siena, alive again.
  Despite her losses,  there may still be a future for Charm and her dynasty.
  Her eldest cubs, Yaya and Tatu, have survived the poisoning.
  Charm keeps the pride moving in a constant search for prey.
  Catching enough food is hard,  even with Yaya's help.
  But Charm is relentless.
  The younger members of the pride try to follow her example.
  Even with little to hunt,  and the constant harassment of hyenas,  Charm's skill and experience as a leader  is keeping the pride alive.
  A few weeks later, her efforts begin to be rewarded.
  Tatu and Red are now over four years old,  ready to take the final step to adulthood.
  It's time for them to leave the pride.
  For Charm, this is success.
  They head out as a partnership  to battle other males,  to win a pride of their own,  and continue the family's bloodline elsewhere.
  But Charm still needs to get the remaining four female cubs  safely to adulthood.
  One early morning in May,  the roar of adult male lions.
  Two new males, outsiders,  are searching for a pride to take over as their own.
  New males could bring the possibility of a new generation of cubs.
  But they could, just as easily,  bring disaster.
  Soon, the new males begin to impose their authority on the Marsh Pride.
  Charm's youngest daughter is still too young to breed.
  To the males, she's nothing more  than another mouth to share food with.
  They don't want her in their pride.
  Try as she might, Charm struggles to defend her daughter.
  Even she is no match for an adult male.
  Charm tries distracting them,  putting herself between them and her cub.
  But it's no good.
  If her daughter stays, the males will eventually kill her.
  The cub has no choice but to leave.
  And the males don't stop there.
  Every young cub is driven out.
  Their future is uncertain.
  There's nothing Charm can do.
  Eight months ago, Charm's pride numbered ten lions.
  Of them, only she and Yaya now remain.
  The return of the Wildebeest signals the end, at last, of the hard times.
  Time for a new beginning.
  Charm is starting the process of rebuilding the Marsh Pride.
  She and one of the males have separated themselves from the rest of the group.
  Females are only able to conceive once every few months.
  For those crucial days, the male won't leave her side.
  Charm stays close to him to strengthen their band.
  If the male isn't certain any future cubs are his,  he will probably kill them.
  Four months later.
  Charm is alone, away from the pride.
  Over the last 14 months,  her dynasty has faced ruin.
  But now, there is new hope.
  just two weeks old,  Charm gave birth away from the others.
  Inquisitive and clumsy lions could be a threat to the newborns.
  But her two cubs are still extremely vulnerable.
  Buffalo seek out lion cubs  and will kill them if they get the chance.
  She shields them with her body.
  Without her to protect them, the buffalo will trample them to death.
  Charm has forced the entire herd to back down.
  Life is always dangerous for lion cubs.
  But these two have an experienced mother to look after them.
  At last, Charm's pride is increasing again.
  One male and one female.
  And these cubs may soon be joined by more.
  Yaya has paired off with the other adult male.
  Soon, she too, will have cubs,  Charm's grandchildren.
  Charm is taking her cubs to meet the rest of the Marsh Pride  for the first time.
  Once their father has accepted the cubs,  he'll defend them as fiercely as their mother.
  They are the future of his dynasty, too.
  Charm has been away from the pride since giving birth,  and hasn't seen Yaya for weeks.
  Their bond has held, through perhaps the hardest times  in the pride's history.
  With her daughter pregnant and her son looking for a pride of his own,  Charm's dynasty, and the Marsh Pride, will live on.
  This extraordinary lioness has succeeded.
  To follow the story of Charm and her family,  the Dynasties team travelled to the Maasai Mara,  one of these big cats' last strongholds.
  The crew's aim is to immerse themselves  in the lives of these powerful predators,  following them closely for over 400 days.
  But first they need to master the tricky task  of identifying each individual lion.
  Every lion has its own unique set of whisker spots.
  And put that together with coat colour,  ear notches, nose colour, you can pretty much  identify that lion.
  It would be really great if we could stick moustaches on them  and glasses and hats,  'cause that would make it a lot easier for everybody to understand  who they were.
  After weeks of following the family for 12 hours a day,  they're getting to know the lions.
  And the lions, it seems, are getting to know them too.
  He's  It was the closest I've ever been.
  - She had her chin over the door.
 - Hmm.
  I mean, my feet are within two feet of her.
  She's big when she's that close.
  Before long, it becomes clear that each lion  has its own particular character.
  On a long project like this, there's a real luxury.
  And the luxury is, you get to know the individuals.
  They are different to each other.
  Some sit and follow, others watch, some are into everything.
  Some are funny, some are really stupid in a way.
  I mean, you can see the rest of the pride kind of rolling their eyes,  as yet another male comes in and blows another hunt.
  You begin to care for them, you can't help it.
  Charm, she is what a lion should be.
  She's a provider, she's a mother.
  She look after cubs that aren't her own.
  She's the matriarch, she's the dame.
  The crew's attachment to the lions  is what makes what happens next so hard to deal with.
  Poisoning is one of the biggest threats lions face across Africa today.
  It becomes very close to home  when it's animals that you know so well  The individuals, we know them very well now.
  It's much more  You feel it much more.
  Soon after the pride leave him,  emergency wildlife vets arrive to try and save Charm's youngest son.
  But the poison has no simple antidote.
  The vets try to ease the symptoms.
  All they and the crew can do now is wait in the hope he can recover,  and return to the pride.
  Eventually, it becomes clear  nothing more can be done for him.
  This animal is in a very bad condition, critical condition.
  And we think it's not going to make.
  Across Africa, the need for teams like these is on the rise,  treating wildlife after encounters with man.
  It's just entirely wrong, isn't it? Lions are so endangered.
  There are hardly any of them, really,  this is one of the best places in the world.
  They're disappearing so quickly, and then, this happens to them.
  Because of pressure on the land, of people.
  Conflict between humans and lions  is increasing throughout the continent.
  Dr.
 Shivani Bhalla is a Kenyan conservationist  who has been working with lions and local communities  for over a decade.
  So many people are surprised to hear that there's only about 20,000 lions  left in Africa, there's less than 2,000 lions left in Kenya.
  They're disappearing so quickly.
  Lions don't have enough food and they don't have enough space,  but communities also don't have enough grazing for their livestock.
  They also don't have enough space.
  We've got to try and understand both sides of the picture.
  Coexistence between people and lions is possible.
  Our strategy has been working with warriors, women, children,  to really bring them on board, and engage them in lion conservation,  because they're the ones herding livestock every day.
  They are the one coming into contact with wildlife every day.
  Community programs have shown that [ions can actually recover in areas where  they used to be once, but then their numbers declined  because they were being killed.
  And Sophie and John  witness that power of recovery first hand, here with Charm.
  Oh, wow.
  Well, that's that, I think, today's the day.
  She's gone in there now to have her cubs,  which is quite exciting, really.
  We're kind of living it with her, really, aren't we?  It's about sharing that experience, that's the whole point,  that's why we're making the film.
  Over a year ago, the team set out to find a lion  and to tell its story.
  And here we are, over a year later,  and just there,  where the camera's pointing  we've got Charm and two little cubs.
  She's had such a hard, hard year.
  I don't think any of us could have  predicted a happier, better way.
 She's the most amazing lion.
  She's just incredible, and  It's the perfect ending, really.
  Lions are incredibly resilient.
  Given space, enough food,  and security, they can bounce back.
  The challenges facing lion conservationists are formidable.
  Indeed, unbelievable though as it may sound,  there is a real possibility that before long,  lions in the wild could disappear entirely.
  But if conservationists and the people who have to live alongside  these great beasts of prey can work together,  there is still a chance to save them.
  Next time, one of the last great families  of painted wolves.
  An intense rivalry.
  Mother against daughter.
  Each striving to rule.
 Who will triumph?  And can they bring peace to these lands?     
                    Here, in the heart of Africa,  lives one of this great continent's most extraordinary yet misunderstood animals.
  Animals that only thrive through remarkable team work,  and through the strength and skill of their leaders.
  Painted wolves, once known as Cape Hunting Dogs,  are one of Africa's most threatened predators.
  Their packs require huge areas of territory in which to hunt.
  But today, because of human pressure, their world is shrinking fast.
  And whereas once neighbours could live together in relative peace,  today there is intense rivalry between them.
  For more than two years,  our team here in Mana Pools in Zimbabwe,  have been following the fortunes of one of the last great families.
  We join them at a moment when competition between mother  and one of her daughters is boiling up,  threatening to not only shatter a long-established peace,  but to tear apart the whole family.
  This is Tait, the family's ruling queen.
  She's a mother and a grandmother.
  For years, she has used her position  to keep the peace within her sprawling family.
  But Tait is now old.
  Her powers are waning.
  Tait still controls the very best hunting territory,  the rich lands on the banks of the Zambezi.
  But she's surrounded.
  To the east lie the dangerous lion pridelands.
  To the south, forests full of hyena.
  And to the west, 5 pack led by one of Tait's daughters, Blacktip.
  For many years, Blacktip has lived in peaceful coexistence with her mother,  each with enough territory to survive.
  But Blacktip's pack has grown huge.
 It's now 30 strong.
  For the first time, she needs more territory  if she's to feed her growing family.
  Normally, a daughter would not invade her mother's territory.
  However, with hyenas ruling to the south,  and humans having taken the hunting lands to the west,  Blacktip has no choice  but to turn her sights east,  towards her mother's lands.
  Where, after a morning's hunt, Tait and her pack are resting.
  Blacktip's pack outnumbers her mother's by more than two to one.
  An ambush!  Against these odds,  Tait is powerless.
  Retreat is the only option.
  This has now become Blacktip's territory.
  A brief but bloody battle.
  Tait and her pack are now homeless.
  She retreats eastwards.
  But this is dangerous country.
  This river marks the boundary between her own territory  and the lion pridelands.
  In her long life, Tait has explored every part of Mana.
  She knows that this is too perilous a place to make a home.
  Lions will search out and kill puppies, and even adults, if they get the chance.
  For now, it's the only place to hide.
  But Tait must keep her family safe,  well away from the 26 lions that rule here.
  Three months have passed since Blacktip's takeover.
  And all these lands are now firmly under her control.
  Blacktip's pack have spent a great deal of time scent marking,  establishing their new territorial boundaries.
  And Blacktip and her family have fed well  on what was her mother's lands.
  But now, it's the dry season, and the landscape is changing.
  The ground is dangerous for hunters who rely on speed.
  Deep footprints left by elephants in soft mud have baked as hard as rock.
  And a painted wolf putting a foot wrong could seriously damage itself.
  The impalas' ability to leap over the worst of the pot holes  now gives them an edge.
  In these conditions, Blacktip's pack will find it hard to feed themselves.
  But the size and strength of the pack might enable her to catch  a totally new kind of prey.
  A large male baboon is strong,  almost twice the weight of a painted wolf.
  And armed with huge canine teeth.
  The great size of Blacktip's pack  means the large males can't defend their troupe against them all.
  The meal has been hard-won.
  But discovering this new possibility has come at just the right time.
  Blacktip won more than just hunting lands  in her battle to claim Tait's territory.
  She secured the safest place to raise puppies in all of Mana Pools.
  And sure enough, Blacktip has a new litter of five hungry pups.
  Their father is babysitting them today.
  Everyone is impatient for the return of the hunting party.
  While they wait, the pups discover  that there's more to the world than just their pack.
  There's no rest for Blacktip.
  She not only leads the hunting trips,  but, as the alpha female, she's the only who breeds  and provides milk for the pups.
  It's not just milk.
  They're already eagerly eating meat.
  Blacktip's hold on Tait's territory appears to be paying off.
  It has been four months since Tait and her pack were forced into exile  here in the lion pridelands.
  Compared to her home territory, there is not only more danger,  but there's much less prey.
  Yet, remarkably, even here,  Tait has managed to keep every member of her pack alive.
  But she is nowhere to be seen.
  The rest of her family are waiting close to an abandoned aardvark burrow.
  And this is why.
  Tait has spent the last three weeks hidden underground.
  She has managed, against the odds, to produce her eighth litter.
  Two tiny puppies emerge for the very first time.
  Honey badgers.
  They are notoriously aggressive, and a danger to the pups.
  Tait's youngest daughter, Tammy, has never seen one before.
  But her instinct tells her to drive them away.
  And this gives Tait the chance to get her pups to safety underground.
  This year, both Tait and Blacktip  have produced far fewer puppies than ever before.
  Perhaps this is the first sign that the conflict between the two packs  is threatening the future of the entire family.
  Twice a day, Tait has to lead her hunting party on a risky journey  to the banks of the Zambezi river, where the prey gather.
  But it is also the very heart of lion territory.
  She must sneak them into position undetected.
  Then, it's in and out as fast as possible.
  The pack need to work fast.
  All that effort for a few mouthfuls of food.
  The puppies will go hungry today.
  And the pack has been dealt another blow.
  Again it's Tammy, Tate's youngest daughter, who spots the problem.
  Tammy's sister has fallen.
  She has broken a leg stumbling into an elephant's footprint.
  For most animals, this would be the end.
  But the family won't just leave her to fend for herself.
  Painted wolves, perhaps more than any other animal,  care for pack members who are old or injured.
  Tait's family will protect and feed her  while she herself cannot join in the hunt.
  The dry season turns to drought.
  The great buffalo herds are on the move.
  Food and water are becoming increasingly scarce.
  All of Mana's inhabitants are now drawn towards the Zambezi  and the few pools that remain along its banks.
  The drought also means that it's time for Blacktip and her pups  to leave their den behind.
  For the pups, this is their first adventure.
  Now the pups are old enough to follow the adults,  Blacktip can resume marking the new boundaries of her territory  to consolidate her takeover.
  On the far eastern borders, Blacktip picks up a familiar scent.
  It's old, but unmistakable.
  Her mother.
  This discovery has an extraordinary effect on Blacktip.
  She can tell from this smell which direction Tait took.
  Blacktip stops territorial marking and instead sets off in pursuit  of her mother.
  It seems that Blacktip is going to try and drive Tait out of Mana  once and for all.
  But she's taking a huge risk by going into territory she doesn't know.
  Hyenas.
  On moonless nights, the pack would normally rest up  somewhere safe until dawn.
  But instead, Blacktip leads them, marching on into the gloom.
  No one wants to be the straggler in the dark.
  The family bunch together much more closely at night.
  And now, 15 hyenas are tracking them.
  Attack may be the best form of defence.
  Blacktip thinks she's got the upper hand,  but she's let her pups get separated.
  The puppy is lost.
  Heads down, tails down, they seem to mourn.
  For hours, they march in silence.
  A solemn procession.
  Despite her loss, Blacktip drives her pack on,  far beyond the boundary of Tait's old territory.
  Tracking her mother into a place she's never been before,  deep into the heart of the lion pridelands.
  Tait, remarkably, has now managed to keep her pack safe from the lions  for eight months.
  Her injured daughter is on the mend.
  The family have been protecting her while she recovers.
  They only survive here by being on constant alert for signs of danger.
  And today it is the wind that carries a warning.
  Blacktip is coming.
  Forewarned, Tait isn't going to risk an attack.
  The pack turns tail and runs.
  The temperature has reached 50 degrees.
  Still, Blacktip pushes her pack on in pursuit.
  They're closing in, less than a mile behind Tait.
  But, finally, the heat is just too much.
  Blacktip is forced to call a halt.
  But danger is approaching.
  The pack has scattered!  And now the lions will try to pick off the puppies.
  There's only one adult with the pups.
  That won't be enough to save them.
  But this might.
  Buffaloes and [ions are always in conflict.
  To charge in alone is very unusual.
  But it's certainly saved the pups.
  Blacktip and her pack have been halted in their tracks.
  Blacktip's pursuit of Tait  has exposed her family to too many dangers,  too many risks.
  The pack are desperate to help,  but there is nothing they can do.
  The pursuit of Tait is over.
  Blacktip's pack run.
  They run, and run.
  Mile after mile.
  Puppies in tow.
  All through the day, all through the night.
  All the way home.
  The territory they stole, abandoned.
  The conflict is over.
  It cost too much.
  Tait and her pack can already sense Blacktip's retreat.
  For the first time since the beginning of the conflict,  they appear relaxed.
  Soon, their keen sense of smell  will tell them their stolen territory is no longer occupied.
  It won't be long until it's time for Tait's pack to also go home.
  But Tait will not be joining them.
  For seven-and-a-half years,  she's been their leader, their matriarch.
  And now, as their exile finally draws to a close,  she has ensured her pack still have a future,  a real chance to reclaim their old territory.
  Before her pack could, at last, head home,  age finally caught up with Tait.
  Too old, too slow,  she was no longer able to evade the lions.
  Her alpha male refused to abandon her.
  Together, they died in the pridelands.
  Tait's pack are left leaderless.
  But the story doesn't end with Tait's passing.
  Life-giving rains follow the drought.
  Hard times are quickly forgotten in times of plenty.
  And the story takes another twist.
  On their way home, Tait's pack attract a band of roving males.
  And with these reinforcements,  they not only reclaim some of Tait's old territory,  but also perform a ritual never witnessed before.
  With these haunting calls, they are choosing their new leader.
  And the chance to continue Tait's bloodline.
  Six months later,  hidden away in a secluded part of the forest,  a litter of seven tiny puppies.
  They're born to Tammy, Tait's youngest daughter,  and now heir to Tait's throne.
  With these new arrivals, and the new males,  Tait's old pack has bounced back to 23 members.
  Tammy now leads a pack that is once again a force to be reckoned with.
  Back in the west, with the conflict long over,  Blacktip has produced 10 healthy puppies of her own.
  Balance has finally been restored to Tait's dynasty.
  There are only 6,600 painted wolves left in the world.
  To date, we count 280 descendants from Tait's bloodline.
  Tait's contribution to the survival of this species is unparalleled.
  Her dynasty feels secure.
  For now, at least.
  Of all the animals featured in this series,  painted wolves range over the greatest distances.
  To document the unfolding story of Tait and Blacktip,  the team first needed to find them, and that required help.
  This film is essentially undoable  without people who really know the dogs.
  Principally Nick and Henry.
  Nick's been working with the dogs for years.
  Not only does he know how to track them incredibly well,  but he also knows their habits and their behaviours.
  So, for 20 years, I've been watching these dogs,  and when you're sitting on the ground and you've got them  running around you, and they're totally unfazed by you,  that's a great experience.
  Nick Murray can identify all of the 91 painted wolves  that the team saw on the floodplains.
  But there's one individual that he knows better than any.
  MURRAY We've been interacting with Tait  for literally ten-and-a-half years of her life.
  With each successive litter that she has,  we've got to know all of those dogs  when they come out of the den and spend time with them.
  Nick's knowledge of who is related to whom,  meant the team knew that it was Tait's own daughter who was challenging her.
  What was unfolding in front of camera was a family drama.
  The crew not only have a team of trackers,  luckily the filming coincided  with a research project.
  The reason for collaring the dogs is to aid our monitoring of the pack.
  Because we're actually able to physically follow the dogs  so we can record their movements,  their territory size, where they're going.
  And that builds up a picture of their land use.
  In open landscapes, these collars can transmit for miles.
  But in the mixed habitat of Mana,  the signal often struggles beyond 500 metres.
  This is where Nick and Henry's tracking skills really come into play.
  Henry's been incredible on this.
 His tracking is unbelievable.
  Tracks are the key to the Whole game.
  They tell the story.
  And it's Henry's highly-tuned tracker senses  that allow the team to capture the pivotal moment in the film.
  The team are tracking Tait's pack  when they drive through a pile of droppings from the painted wolves.
  I recognised the smell which is Blacktip, not Tait.
  Blacktip's diet of baboons  is enough for Henry to be able to tell the packs apart  simply by smell alone.
  The team quickly switch from following Tait's radio channel  to Blacktip's.
  Right away we heard the very strong "ping, ping,"  so we carried on down to the river.
  Sure enough, they were right there,  which is an area they'd never been before.
  It was incredible.
  And then Henry noticed  some lions approaching through the grass.
  Knowing that there are puppies in their pack,  I just turned my head away from the scene.
  You know, I just didn't want to see, um,  any of the pups getting harmed.
  I just stayed with the lion, and suddenly this huge buffalo  came into shot.
  I think what was amazing for me  was to see the lions interact with the dogs.
  But to then catch a buffalo under the very same tree,  that's just ridiculous.
  I tell you, I just like stood there dumbfounded, mesmerised,  seeing the whole scene that was going on.
  It was like a dream, really.
  To try to capture every aspect  of the unfolding story,  it was sometimes necessary to have five camera teams  working simultaneously.
  We've got 52 cases of kit.
  A Cineflex, a night thermal camera, and umpteen other things.
  It's very ambitious, what we're trying to achieve.
  Not wanting to miss a thing,  our teams follow both packs,  on the ground,  and in the air.
  One ground team with Tait, the other with Blacktip.
  Employing the latest in unmanned aerial camera technology  allows the crew to capture unique views  as the pack go about their business undisturbed.
  To cover more ground the crew bring in a helicopter.
  And as the days draw to an end,  the latest ultra high-definition, low-light cameras  capture the action,  even when it's almost too dark to see.
  And once complete darkness falls, the night team take over.
  A thermal camera can penetrate the darkness with no need  for any artificial light.
  You know, to get those shots, it takes a lot of skill.
  And that is not our skill, that is our guide's skill.
  Oh, there they are, over there.
  The yield of shots has gotten better and better on every shoot.
  On the last shoot we were with them every day.
  And that's What's brilliant about being able to put true time in.
  And it's tough, actually, because you spend  day in, day out with these animals for months and months and months.
  And their lives become very important to you,  and the story can be incredible.
  But it's actually quite an emotional roller-coaster  to see what happens to them.
  This story of family rivalry  only began because Blacktip was unable to expand her territory away from Tail;  and was forced instead to invade her mother's lands.
  The biggest problem facing painted wolves today is habitat loss.
  Basically, they're running out of space.
  We have isolated National Parks surrounded by human settlements.
  In the modern world, that means they're  running across roads, they're hitting snares,  getting poisoned.
  It's a It's a tough world out there for them.
  7% of painted wolves  actually live outside of the National Park system.
  Their future is very bleak.
 It's not looking good.
  So the wild dogs of the Zambezi Valley are lucky,  because these dogs can travel  But that's not the case in most areas in Africa.
  If you came back in ten years' time,  I think Tammy's descendants will still be around,  battling it out against the lions and hyenas.
  It's a tough life, never mind the human conflict.
  Painted wolves, individually, may lack the nobility of a lion,  but the subtlety of their communications  and the complexity of their social organisation  gives them a fascination all of their own.
  Surely they deserve to hold their place  alongside the great hunters of the African plain.
  Next time  A tigress struggles to rear her new family.
  Rivals are trespassing on her territory.
  Can she raise her cubs through adulthood?     
                    Tigers are the largest, most powerful,  and perhaps the most loved of all the big cats.
  Yet, over the past century,  their numbers have declined by 95%.
  Our team has spent two years following one tigress  with her cubs as she attempts to rear them.
  Her problems come not just from the natural world,  but from having to do so at close quarters with us.
  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve in the heart of India.
  A rich, tropical jungle.
  At the base of this cliff,  a secret cave  hiding within is a tigress known as Raj Bera  Two weeks ago, she chose this cave  in which to give birth to her new family.
  This is her daughter, Biba.
  And these are her first, rather unsteady steps.
  Biba has three brothers.
  The four of them together are the next generation  of this tiger dynasty.
  Raj Bera is one of the most formidable predators on earth.
  But her cubs are vulnerable and will remain so  for the next two years.
  It will take all her strength and skill as a mother  to protect and provide for them,  if she is to raise them to adulthood.
  This forest has everything a tiger family needs.
  Plenty of fresh water,  dense thickets for concealment,  and open grasslands full of prey.
  After two hungry weeks confined to the den with her cubs,  Raj Bera needs food.
  She is an experienced hunter.
  But her prey are always on high alert.
  Fortunately, she knows how to disappear.
  Even with her experience,  most hunts end this way.
  But now she faces a dilemma.
  As evening draws in,  leaving the cubs unprotected in their den  could put them in danger.
  The night shift are already on the prowl.
  A sloth bear.
  It will kill cubs if it can find them.
  Once a den has been discovered, it's no longer safe.
  She needs to move her family.
  The family are safe at a new den.
  An experienced tigress like Raj Bera  may know half a dozen hideaways like this.
  Even though she failed in her hunt,  the cubs are as hungry for milk as ever.
  For a tigress to feed and protect,  as many as four young is a relentless challenge.
  It's unlikely that she will be able to raise them all.
  And in India today,  there are new pressures, making it harder than ever  to rear a family to adulthood.
  Raj Bera's territory is just big enough to support her cubs,  but she's surrounded by territories held by other tigers.
  And all are encircled by human settlement.
  There are about 80 tigers in Bandhavgarh.
  This is an unusually high density.
  Competition for space is intense.
  Scarred faces are evidence of battles between rivals.
  To keep her territory secure,  Raj Bera regularly patrols its 12-mile-long boundary.
  Each time she sprays, she's marking a line  that other tigers know they cross at their peril.
  Territory marking in the midday heat is hard work.
  She needs to cool off.
  An amorous male peacock.
  Every day, she has to strike an almost impossible balance,  dividing her time between hunting,  scent marking her boundaries,  and nursing her cubs.
  For now the demands of her young family must take precedence.
  Her cubs have reached the stage when they start exploring.
  Although even walking hasn't been completely mastered.
  Differences between the cubs are beginning to appear.
  The three brothers are caught up in a rough and tumble.
  But their sister, Biba, holds back.
  She is smaller and not as strong as her brothers.
  And these differences will only become more apparent,  as they grow older.
  Two months later and the family has left the den for good.
  The cubs are now strong enough to follow their mother.
  She must now start on their education.
  She shows them around her territory.
  And most importantly, introduces them to a new diet.
  Meat.
  The cubs have doubled in size,  so that she has to hunt even more frequently  to provide for their growing appetites.
  Since the birth of her cubs,  Raj Bera has not been able to patrol her territory  as regularly as she did.
  And that has given a rival an opportunity.
  This is Solo,  Raj Bera's adult daughter.
  And she is trespassing on her mother's lands,  some of the richest in the whole of Bandhavgarh.
  She may be unaware that Raj Bera is hunting here.
  Normally adult tigers avoid each other.
  Because fights even between mother and daughter can be fatal.
  But now, 5010 appears to be testing her mother.
  Faced with Raj Bera's confident advance,  Solo immediately defers, rolling on her back like a cub.
  She's not old enough or strong enough  to challenge for the territory  Yet.
  Raj Here is still the ruler here.
  But Solo has issued a warning.
  With their territory secure,  the family can relax together.
  The cubs are now spending more and more time  developing their coordination and agility.
  And they do that through play.
  A Wild boar.
  It could be on the menu of an adult tiger.
  But one of the male cubs is being a little ambitious.
  Perhaps not yet.
  Winter arrives in Bandhavgarh.
  The cubs are nine months old.
  In their adolescence.
  And the neighbours are beginning to take them more seriously.
  Raj Bera has done well to keep all her cubs alive so far.
  Typically only 50% of tiger cubs survive to adulthood.
  But now, the family relationships are changing.
  She no longer lets the cubs eat first.
  She has to teach them that one day  they will have to provide for themselves.
  Once she has had her fill, her sons dominate the carcass.
  It's only when they have finished that their smaller sister, Biba,  gets her chance to feed undisturbed.
  Alarm calls warn of an intruder.
  This time it's an adult male tiger.
  He's a third bigger than Raj Bera and much more power-flit.
  This is the cubs' favourite water hole.
  Mother and sons  sleep off their meal.
  But Biba heads off alone.
  Adult male tigers sometimes kill cubs,  so, to approach one is a huge risk.
  Unless of course he's your father,  the only male in the forest who would never harm her.
  Tiger fathers rarely meet their offspring.
  And he doesn't seem keen to get acquainted.
  But while he is patrolling the forest, other males will keep away.
  And the cubs will be safe.
  For everything else, the cubs depend on Raj Bera.
  She still has to provide for the whole family.
  It's summer.
  Over the next few weeks the searing heat will suck  the moisture from the land.
  Temperatures soar to over 45 degrees.
  And Bandhavgarh has to survive the worst drought in a decade.
  It's a good time to be a vulture.
  The water holes in Raj Bera's territory become magnets for the park's  thirsty inhabitants.
  Normally, langurs spend  most of their time out of reach in the trees.
  But during the drought,  they must risk crossing open ground to get water.
  Once the braver adults make their move, the rest of the troop follow.
  Out of their comfort zone, they're nervous.
  No danger here,  as far as she can see.
  But you can't drink and watch all at the same time.
  Here in the heart of Raj Here's territory,  these water holes become the focus of the family's life  throughout these driest months.
  It's not just prey that are drawn here to the water holes.
  A new trespasser.
  It seems this tigress is way of pressing her claim today.
  But it's clear there are now more rivals for Raj Here's hunting territory.
  And now distant roars signal further trouble.
  Solo, Raj Bera's adult daughter, is mating for the first time.
  She will soon have her own family with new mouths to feed.
  And its not long before she's back,  hunting deep in her mother's territory.
  She is poaching.
  The year-old cubs are practising their hunting skills  on each other.
  Capturing prey requires power and agility.
  As well as the skills of ambush and attack.
  Their survival will depend on mastering the ability to kill.
  But for another eight months,  their mother must continue to provide.
  And she's having to work much harder now.
  Even a kill as big as this  won't last the family more than a couple of days.
  Her sons are the first to every meal  and jealously guard their share.
  Biba is forced to wait.
  She will be lucky if she gets anything more than scraps.
  Leaving her well-fed brothers behind,  Biba tries to hunt for herself.
  She's watched her mother do this many times.
  Stalk  and drop.
  She has mastered the technique of becoming invisible.
  But she doesn't yet have the size or strength to strike.
  Strong winds signal the arrival of the monsoon.
  The abundance of water means that, for most of the forest's inhabitants,  the good times have returned.
  But the monsoon is the worst time for Raj Bera and her family.
  Her prey are no longer dependent on the water holes.
  They are now free to disperse throughout her territory.
  They will be much harder for her to ambush.
  A few weeks later near the western boundary of her lands,  there has been a fight.
  And Raj Bera is injured.
  A serious injury to a mother tiger  can mean starvation for her cubs.
  Biba is invariably the last  to benefit from her mother's hunting.
  She needs to fend for herself.
  And to do that, she must find her own territory,  away from her brothers.
  But where can she go?  Every other territory is already occupied.
  She's forced to search outside Bandhavgarh altogether.
  Her mother will never see her again.
  The male cubs are also going hungry.
  They, too, are trying to fend for themselves.
  The deer are too alert for novices.
  With the demands of three adolescent male cubs  and increasing hostility from her rivals,  Raj Bera is facing the greatest ever threat to her dynasty.
  She takes a drastic step  and leaves the safety of the park in the hope of easier prey.
  Cattle in the neighbouring villages.
  For tigress and people, there is real danger here.
  It's a conflict that Raj Bera cannot win.
  Dawn, the next day.
  Raj Bera.
  She was rescued by the park authorities  and released back into her territory,  to rejoin her family.
  Over the last two years,  she's struggled to raise her cubs safely to this point.
  And although she's lost her daughter,  her sons are on the brink of adulthood.
  Against the odds,  she still has the chance to secure the future  of her tiger dynasty.
  A century ago, there were more than 100,000 tigers.
  Today, there are only 4,000,  with 7096 of them found in India,  mostly in protected areas  such as Bandhavgarh.
  Indian conservationists like Krithi Karanth  are concerned about the challenges facing these reserves.
  Unlike parks in Africa and the Americas,  parks in India are extremely small.
  So tiger populations in these tiny parks are under huge pressure.
  There is a real danger  that we could see this amazing cat go extinct.
  Bandhavgarh is home to over 80 tigers.
  But, as director Theo Webb discovers,  they're not easy to find.
  I just saw a tiger which turned out to be red sand.
  I'm the stupid one today.
  Even the real thing is almost invisible.
  So, right here is one of the problems why we can't find tigers,  because they are so well hidden.
  If you look in here,  they are so well camouflaged,  especially in this dense undergrowth.
  Her stripes blend in exactly with the bamboo.
  It's almost impossible to see them.
  Local guides have told the crew  of a tigress they call Raj Bera who is expecting cubs.
  If they can find her, she will be the perfect tiger to follow.
  The guides listen for other animals' warning calls.
  Monkey leaping along.
  That's a sign that the tiger's, like, right there.
  Okay.
  The team can then home in on the tiger.
  So we've just come across this tigress.
  We heard alarm calls, followed her here,  and it could be our female that we've been looking for.
  We've done a comparison between two photos,  one we know is her,  and one of her, I think, just now.
 They're looking similar.
  - It's pretty much her.
 - Yeah.
  It's Raj Bera.
  But where is her den?  A tigress will choose  the most inaccessible place to give birth.
  Impossible to follow in a vehicle.
  But the forest department have elephants  to help protect the animals against poachers.
  And While patrolling the forest, they also search for dens.
  Two weeks later, Raj Bera's den has been discovered.
  She's chosen one of the most inaccessible spots in the whole park,  to make her den, which is kinda sensible if you're a tiger.
  Now they need to film the family without disturbing them.
  Cameraman, John Brown, positions a remote-controlled camera  away from the den.
  The specially designed tripod allows John to retreat even further  to minimise disturbance.
  He's finally rewarded with an extremely rare view.
  Cubs just a few weeks old.
  Today's been absolutely incredible.
  We've had a completely unique view into the life of tigers.
  It's been one of the most amazing moments of my career.
  I never thought we'd get it actually,  but, you know I didn't tell anyone else that.
  Once the cubs leave the den,  the family disappears into the forest.
  Now the crew have to switch to a new technique.
  Camera traps,  used regularly by the park authorities.
  They stake out likely locations including water holes.
  Inhabitants tum up.
  But no tigers.
  A few weeks later, Theo discovers  that one of the camera traps has somehow become flooded.
  Wow.
  Oh, my God.
  Mystery solved.
  And, at last, intimate shots of the cubs.
  And eventually even of their father.
  For another nine months,  the crew are able to follow the life of the family  as the cubs grow up.
  But then, suddenly, they witness a very different side to the story.
  So, somewhere over here is our tigress.
  In order to find food,  she's coming to these really risky areas,  to hunt cattle, clogs, whatever she can find.
  So, this is really scary for her.
  And to be honest, for us as well.
  There is no other tiger reserve within 50 miles.
  So, whenever a tiger leaves the park,  it's inevitable that it will encounter people.
  The forest department take control.
  Raj Bera is tranquillised, and taken to safety.
  And, next day, is returned to her territory.
  We've been filming this female for two years  and we've got attached to her.
  We've seen her with these two-week-old cubs,  we've seen her lose one cub,  and now we've seen her outside the park.
  This is the life of a modern tiger.
  It's not easy.
 It's not how it used to be for them.
  We need to create more space for tigers to move, breed, and disperse.
  It is our responsibility to make sure  that future generations of children, including my own,  get to see tigers in the wild.
  All the animals we've seen in this series  need space in which to live.
  And loss of space is a great threat  to their survival as it is to virtually all other species.
  We ourselves, one single species, have ta ken over vast tracts  of the habitable surface of the planet.
  Surely, we should allow those other creatures,  we share the planet with,  to retain some part of their ancient heritage.
 
                    The duels between hunters and hunted  are as dramatic as any event in the natural world.
  The stakes could not be higher.
  For both, it's a matter of life and death.
  Yet, surprisingly, it's the hunters that usually fail.
  To have any chance of survival,  predators must be perfectly tuned to their own hunting arenas.
  Every habitat brings a different challenge.
  This series will reveal, as never before,  the extraordinary range of strategies predators use to catch their prey.
  But even for the most skillful  success is never guaranteed.
  A female leopard on the prowl.
  Few predators instill more fear.
  Yet, out in the open, she has little chance of catching anything.
  To succeed, she must get within a few meters of her prey, undetected.
  Her strategy is to use cover,  wearing it like a cloak of invisibility.
  She's an expert in stealth.
  Impala are her favorite prey.
  This one is just out of her range.
  She needs to get closer, within four meters.
  She only has a short burst of speed.
  She must stay hidden until she's in the strike zone.
  But out of sight doesn't mean out of mind.
  Impala have acute hearing and a superb sense of smell.
  Now the only prey she can see is right out in the open.
  But leopards are the most versatile of all the big cats,  adept at finding cover in the most unpromising places.
  The steep walls of the gully are now her cover for an ambush.
  The male puku is close enough, but he's too big to tackle.
  She needs to slip past him without being seen.
  If he spots her, he'll blow her cover.
  Slowly does it.
  To succeed here,  she needs to find prey grazing close to the edge.
  Or better still, in the gully itself.
  Frustration.
  Success would have staved off hunger for a week.
  But while there's prey around, there's hope.
  Peeking over the top is a risk,  but it's the quickest way to find a new target.
  A burst of speed of 65kmph  and it's all over in less than six seconds.
  Except, it isn't.
  Dazed and disorientated,  the impala makes a miraculous escape.
  It's been the perfect stealth hunt  and she's nothing to show for it.
  But then, six out of seven leopard hunts end in failure.
  A leopard's hunting strategy depends on finding cover.
  But how do you catch your prey  in a place where there's literally nowhere to hide?  That's the challenge facing Zambia's wild dogs.
  This close-knit pack is made up of one adult female  and her 12 offspring from last year.
  Unlike the solitary leopard,  wild dogs depend for their survival on teamwork.
  Dogs that play together,  work together.
  Each morning, the pack heads out across the open plain,  prospecting for prey.
  Mother decides which direction they go.
  The rest stay close.
  They'll keep going for kilometers until they find the right kind of prey.
  Adult zebra are too big a challenge.
  And the same goes for tsessebe.
  An oribi is an easier target.
  But is it worth the effort,  especially on an oribi that's as fit and bouncy as this one?  Better to save their energy for something bigger.
  A wildebeest.
  It's what they've been looking for.
  The dogs need to make the wildebeest run.
  Their success will depend on wearing him down in a long chase.
  While the prey's running, the dogs have the advantage.
  But when the wildebeest stand their ground, the tables are turned.
  Faced with a wall of horns,  the pack is powerless.
  But not all the wildebeest have had the courage to stop.
  Now the real contest begins.
  The wildebeest are big and strong.
  But the dogs have stamina.
  Right now, hunters and hunted are clocking 65kmph.
  The dogs can keep up this pace for kilometers.
  The wildebeest can't.
  One wildebeest peels off.
  Then another two.
  The split confuses the inexperienced pack,  sending them in different directions.
  The mother and one youngster continue on.
  The rest of the pack stop, believing they have an easier target.
  It's a mistake.
  Like a beast with two heads, each bull protects the other's rear.
  And the dogs can do nothing.
  Ahead, the chase continues.
  Another wildebeest peels off.
  Now the mother has just one in her sights.
  But it will mean nothing without the help of the rest of the pack.
  The situation here has reached stalemate.
  The young dogs have lost valuable time.
  They must try and catch up with their mother.
  Back at the front, the mother is beginning to tire.
  And the wildebeest knows it,  bouncing to show he's still strong and not worth chasing.
  But fresh, young legs are catching up fast.
  When one dog tires,  there's always another member of the team to take up the lead.
  The dogs now have the numbers to bring the wildebeest down.
  Each bite risks a broken jaw,  but going for the legs is the only way to stop it.
  And they must do so before it reaches the safety of the herd,  a few hundred meters ahead.
  After a 20-minute chase, the bull's energy is near spent.
  This time there will be no sanctuary within the herd.
  The dogs' stamina has been rewarded.
  All they must do now is to bring their quarry to the ground.
  Working as a pack  allows wild dogs to take on prey ten times heavier  than any one of them.
  But many mouths need a lot of food.
  The price they pay for these numbers  is knowing they'll have to attempt the same thing again tomorrow  and every day.
  Teamwork and stamina on Africa's open plains  have proved to be a winning combination.
  But in the dense and complex world of the jungle,  hunting is a never-ending game of hide and seek.
  Here, it pays to sit still  and blend in  because you just never know who's watching.
  The Parson's chameleon is an expert  in the see-and-not-be-seen game.
  It lets its eyes do all the work  while the rest of its body moves in slow motion,  so as not to scare possible targets.
  The problem is that it can only see prey if it moves.
  So is this a stick insect  or a stick?  Ah-hah.
  Time to unleash its secret weapon  a tongue longer than its body.
  The Parson's close cousin, the nasutum chameleon,  has the same weapon, but in miniature.
  As small as a matchstick, he needs to get much closer to its prey.
  But even with eyes as big as its stomach,  this isn't the meal deal he was hoping for.
  In the jungle, it's hard finding the right-sized prey  when you're a tiny predator.
  Promising opportunities  can quickly turn to disappointment.
  Spotting any kind of prey in this dense, green world  is hard.
  If you do find something, you want to make sure it doesn't escape.
  The praying mantis has arms  that can strike ten times faster than a blink of the eye.
  And it's the only insect known to see in 3D.
  Perfect for judging strike distances.
  But like the chameleon,  her problem is seeing prey when it freezes.
  She needs some movement to be sure it's food.
  Just the tiniest sign of life.
  Yep, that's done it.
  The lightning strike has given her the edge over her insect prey,  but it doesn't pay to be complacent.
  In the jungle arms race,  only too often there's someone else with a more powerful weapon.
  And there's one predator that has, perhaps,  the most ingenious answer of all to the jungle's challenge.
  It lives along rivers in the rainforests of Madagascar.
  The insects it hunts fly down the same jungle corridors.
  But there's a problem.
  It's a web-building spider.
  So how does it get over the river to hunt?  It's called Darwin's bark spider  and the female has a remarkable strategy.
  Like a real-life Spider-Woman,  she sprays strands of silk in one long, continuous flow.
  The threads fan out like a sail  and drift on air currents blowing across the water.
  Every few seconds, she crimps the strands together  to stop them spreading too widely.
  The breeze will do the rest,  blowing the threads into a single line and a twenty-five meter bridge.
  Now she must reinforce her bridge, because her web will hang from it.
  But there's something bouncing the line at the other end.
  Another Darwin's spider is trying to take advantage of her hard work.
  She must deal with the intruder head on.
  The cut line is an inconvenience,  but no more than that.
  With hooks on the tips of each leg, she gathers in the thread.
  It won't go to waste, as she'll eat it later.
  When it's all reeled in, she sprays again.
  Out streams another 25 meter bridging line.
  How a spider, no bigger than a thumbnail,  can produce so much silk so quickly  has baffled scientists.
  And it's no ordinary silk.
  It's the toughest natural fiber on the planet,  tougher than steel.
  And it needs to be tough to span the wide river.
  With the bridge taut and the ground anchor in place,  it's time to construct her trap.
  These spiders can build the world's largest orb webs,  up to two meters wide.
  A few hours from the first spray of bridging line,  the job is done.
  Now her strategy is simple  sit and wait.
  And there's one final bout of silk production,  shrink-wrapping her food for later.
  Not all rivers provide their predators  with a steady supply of prey.
  On the Grumeti River in Tanzania  lives the planet's most patient predator.
  A Nile crocodile.
  Five meters long,  Seven hundred kilos  and very hungry.
  His last square meal was nearly a year ago.
  The river's other residents aren't food  just a distraction.
  He is waiting for something bigger  from over the horizon.
  But beyond the big croc's isolated river,  there's still no sign of the migratory herds  he depends on for survival.
  Other, smaller crocs are waiting, too,  but their meal ticket depends on the hunting skills of the big guy.
  The herds could be here in a week, or a month.
  In rare years, not at all.
  Until then, the crocs must conserve their energy.
  Finally, the sound they've all been waiting for.
  The herds have arrived.
  It's time for the crocs to get into position.
  All eyes will be on the big guy.
  Only he has the power to tackle a full-grown wildebeest.
  The year-long wait is almost over.
  After months on the march, the wildebeest are desperate to drink.
  But experience has taught the adults to be cautious.
  The water is just too inviting for a calf,  unaware of the dangers within.
  But every wildebeest must take its chances  and hope that its reflexes are faster  than what many know lurks in the murky waters.
  Just a harmless hippo.
  That was no hippo.
  It's put the wildebeest more on edge.
  But here, fear always gives way to thirst.
  Catching the wildebeest is all about timing.
  The big croc's technique is rusty.
  It's been a whole year since his last hunt  and he's out of practice.
  But this isn't the end of the drama, just an intermission.
  For the next two weeks,  waves of wildebeest will pass through the Grumeti.
  Time for the big croc to try a different tactic.
  The floating log.
  He's hoping the wildebeest won't notice him until it's too late.
  Now the smaller crocs move in.
  The big croc will need their help to tear off chunks.
  Crocs can't chew, so they have to spin together  to tear pieces off the carcass.
  Everyone gets their share  and it's all thanks to the big guy.
  He won't feed again until the wildebeest return next year.
  Across the globe, millions of animals are continuously on the move  in search of seasonal food.
  But it's not just prey animals that must migrate.
  Some predators have to journey, too.
  Amur falcons are one of the world's greatest long-distance travelers.
  As their prey dries up in their breeding grounds in Siberia,  they embark on an epic migration to Southern Africa,  crossing 14 countries, two continents and one ocean.
  Only here, in this remote valley in northeast India,  do they join forces.
  A million falcons  and the greatest gathering of birds of prey on the planet.
  This valley is a vital pit stop on the falcons' migration.
  The tiny raptors can go no further  until they build up their fat reserves  and they've timed their arrival here perfectly.
  For just a few weeks each year, winged termites, alates,  leave the safety of their mounds in millions.
  High in calories, these alates are exactly what the falcons need  to fuel their oceanic crossing,  the longest made by any bird of prey.
  To have any chance of surviving their journey,  they must nearly double their weight in just two weeks.
  Those that make it to South Africa  will have to do the whole trip back again in four months' time.
  For Amur falcons,  survival means flying 22,000 kilometers every year of their lives.
  For some predators, it's not the distance they have to travel  that's their greatest challenge,  but the size of their prey.
  And few challenges come bigger than the one in this ocean.
  Each year, female humpback whales  journey from their feeding grounds in Antarctica to Australia  to have their calves.
  These calm, warm waters are a perfect nursery.
  Perfect, but for one thing.
  Orcas, killer whales.
  They appear just as the migration begins.
  And they're on the hunt for calves.
  Highly intelligent, orca are the ocean's most successful predator.
  When hunting, they can travel at 50 kmph  twice as fast as a mother and calf.
  The hunters close in silently.
  It's only now that the mother realizes they've been followed.
  The orca have the advantage of numbers,  but they need to be cautious.
  The mother's rear is protected by a five-meter-wide tail  that could slice through them.
  Her flanks are defended by a pair of long, barnacle-covered flippers.
  And in the middle is the calf,  riding high on its mother's back and out of reach.
  To separate mother from calf,  the orca must use all their intelligence.
  They take it in turns  to try and wave wash the baby away from its mother.
  In a month, the calf would be strong enough to withstand the onslaught.
  Not now.
  But then the tables are turned.
  A male humpback arrives, driving the orca away with its flippers.
  And the situation worsens when a second male appears.
  Now the pod face the power of three 40-tonne whales,  and the escorts make their weight count.
  The bubbles are like a smokescreen,  blocking the orcas' vision and sonar.
  There's a real danger of being injured  by an unseen fluke or flipper.
  With the escorts defending both sides of the mother,  the killer whales have been outmaneuvered.
  As the orca retreat, the escorts drive home their advantage,  pushing the hunters further away.
  It's an error of judgment.
  With mother and calf unprotected,  the orca double back before the humpbacks can react.
  The killer whales separate the calf from its mother.
  They push the calf underwater  and drown it.
  The intelligent hunters have turned defeat into victory.
  The orcas' prize is so large that sharks are quick to take advantage.
  Through intelligence, stamina and teamwork,  the orca have mastered the ocean's greatest challenge.
  Yet even they fail as often as they succeed.
  Most predators fail most of the time.
  It's what makes them the hardest-working animals  on the planet.
  The pressure is even greater when they have other mouths to feed.
  At eight months old,  these cubs are still totally dependent on their mother.
  To support them she must kill something large, like a gazelle,  nearly every day.
  But these youngsters are proof  that she has overcome the challenge of their habitat.
  Few cheetah mothers get this far with four cubs.
  If the cubs are to survive without her,  they must watch their mother carefully  and learn the strategies for hunting on the open plains.
  There's a lot to take in.
  They'll need to learn that their top speed  can only be sustained for a few seconds.
  They'll have to master how to match the twisting turns of the prey,  so they get close enough to trip it.
  And they will soon learn the margin for error is tiny.
  The odds are against them.
  90% of cheetah cubs  never make it to their second birthday.
  Even with this experienced mother,  the future for this family is far from certain.
  All any predator can do is to keep on trying.
 
                    The High Arctic in winter.
  One of the toughest places on Earth in which to live.
  Only three top predators are able to survive here.
  The wolf, searching for its prey  over the frozen lands.
  The Arctic fox, scraping a living on the empty coasts.
  And out on the sea ice, the polar bear.
  To live here, year round,  these hunters must exploit the good times  so that they can endure the bad.
  All life in the Arctic must face one fundamental problem.
  Not the cold,  but the endless cycle of change.
  When the sun returns to the Arctic in spring,  it launches the greatest event of seasonal change on Earth.
  A change that rules the life  of the world's only sea ice hunter  The polar bear is totally dependent  upon the sea ice in order to hunt.
  It must eat two thirds of the food it needs  for the whole year  in the next three months,  before the sun melts the ice from beneath its feet.
  Seals are the bear's most important prey.
  At the start of spring, they come out onto the ice to give birth to their pups.
  Beneath it, they can't stray far from their breathing holes.
  That makes it easy for the bears.
  But that window of opportunity is brief.
  Soon, the sea ice is riddled with melt holes.
  The seal pups have grown large enough to swim  and disappear into the water.
  It's increasingly hard-going for the polar bear.
  Now, resting seals  are surrounded by holes in the ice,  so they have their pick of escape routes.
  And, once in the water,  they can easily out-swim a bear.
  Each seal is very sensitive to every movement  on the surrounding ice.
  A bear can only hope to get close enough to pounce  by taking advantage of the melt holes.
  Ah Not as straightforward as it looks.
  The trick is to find the hole nearest to the seal  without popping up in view  and ruining the surprise.
  Almost there.
  But once under the ice,  it's easy to lose your bearings.
  Blast!  Gently does it.
  Oops.
  Only one in five stalks is successful on this thin ice  at the end of spring.
  The bear's best season is ending.
  An expanse of sea-ice the size of Australia will soon break up.
  The Arctic's best hunting is no longer out on the frozen ocean,  but on the land that surrounds it.
  And that is the territory of a different kind of hunter.
  After a lean winter and spring,  the good times have finally arrived for the Arctic wolf.
  On the land, the snow is melting away as summer approaches.
  And that makes the job of finding prey  considerably easier.
  Arctic hares.
  Like the wolves, they stay white throughout the short summer.
  While they can run, they can't hide.
  And to make matters worse, now is the time they have their young.
  A mother hare risks feeding her leverets  for only a few minutes each day.
  Her white color makes her only too conspicuous.
  When wolves are spotted, Mum runs for it.
  That makes sense.
 Her leverets have a better chance without her.
  Unlike their mother, the leverets are camouflaged.
  They're nearly impossible to spot, even when right upon them.
  What they must do  is keep their nerve.
  When forced to break,  they can still give the wolves a run for their money.
  The leveret hunt may appear an unfair contest.
  But for every one caught, hundreds more remain hidden.
  Food is so hard to find this far north  that a wolf pack must search hundreds of square kilometers  if it's to be successful.
  And success means raising the next generation.
  To do that here, the wolves must work together.
  So, the young are raised not only by their parents,  but by their aunts and uncles as well.
  Together, they try to ensure that each pup reaches near-adult size  before the snow returns.
  A growing pup needs more than just a few leverets.
  The wolves need bigger prey  and, to catch that  they must hunt as a pack.
  Adult hares may be easy to spot,  but they are far from easy to catch.
  They run at 40 miles an hour.
  To catch one, the wolves work as a team.
  One of them gets close enough to bite the hare's tail  but a hare can change direction in an instant.
  If it can continue to sidestep and jink,  it may ultimately outlast them.
  Finally, it gets away.
  For the next hare, the whole pack gives chase.
  Now, numbers count.
  The lead wolves keep up the pace.
  Others run on either side, so the hare can't change direction.
  A tiny meal for the whole pack  but the only one there is.
  By July, time is running out for the polar bear.
  Three million square miles of ice are fractured and adrift.
  The seals are now much harder to find.
  Scattered within an ever-shifting maze  the advantage has swung away from the bear.
  With the ice now broken up, the bear can't even get close.
  She's too visible and noisy in her approach.
  She has no choice but to change her tactics.
  She swims amongst the drift ice  and keeps a low profile.
  Once the seal is in the water, it's as good as lost.
  She has to grab it before it hits the water.
  The margin for error is tiny  and the cost can be great.
  Each failed attempt brings her closer to starvation.
  At this time of year, polar bears, on average,  succeed only once in 20 hunts.
  If the hunter is skinny, like this one, that may not be often enough.
  All she can do is keep trying.
  To prevent her scent betraying her,  she makes a wide sweep to get downwind of the seal.
  Getting close.
  She's now right behind the seal.
  Incredibly, she caught the seal underwater.
  It's only small, but even so,  its blubber alone will contain 100,000 calories,  enough to sustain this bear for a week.
  And, in that time, she might even catch another.
  But this can't go on forever.
  As summer continues, temperatures are rising.
  Each hunt requires more energy,  draining the bears of their reserves.
  When the melt is finally complete,  it reveals some of the ocean's richest waters.
  There is an explosion of life.
  Millions of birds arrive from the south.
  In the 24-hour daylight, they can feed around the clock.
  The Arctic coasts are suddenly thronged by breeding birds.
  The window of opportunity has now opened for a third hunter,  the Arctic fox.
  After a winter spent scavenging, the foxes can now finally hunt.
  It's the best time to have pups.
  Up to 20 of them will be raised to independence in just 90 days.
  But none of them will survive their first year,  unless their parents make the most of the short summer.
  With the snow gone, the foxes shed their white fur  and become a camouflaging brown.
  It makes hunting easier.
  But some birds have  a dramatic answer to the fox problem.
  There are no trees, so they make their nests high on sea cliffs,  well out of the reach of a fox.
  The vast majority, however, are forced to nest on the ground.
  Many of them rely on camouflage.
  Eider ducks slow their heart beats, which helps them avoid detection.
  Others have no need to stay out of sight.
  The powerful Arctic skuas defend their eggs with aggression.
  And dirty tricks!  There are other options for the fox.
  Each year, upwards of 30 million little auks come to the Arctic.
  They nest in the scree slopes at the base of the cliffs.
  Their answer to the fox problem, is to hide deep among the boulders.
  And it seems to work.
  A hungry fox can get very frustrated.
  Running at the auks is not the answer.
  He needs to be more patient.
  It's time to use that famous foxy cunning.
  If the boulders can hide the auks, they can also hide a fox.
  A tiny head, in among the boulders.
  The auks are just too quick off the mark.
  What is needed is a distraction of some kind.
  A glaucous gull, also hunting auks.
  Little auks may cope with one threat, but what about two?  The auks are out-foxed  and the pups  will get their supper.
  It's now the final weeks of summer.
  The sea ice has completely gone.
  The bears that wandered freely over the frozen ocean all winter  are now marooned on beaches.
  The seals are fishing out at sea.
  Only walrus join the bears on the shore.
  But adult walrus are gigantic.
  They weigh two tonnes, and armed with long tusks,  they're too dangerous for bears to take on.
  During these ice-free months, the bears' bodies almost shut down.
  They are zombie bears.
  Overheated, hungry,  pining for the ice to return.
  But some bears refuse to take the summer lying down.
  This bear is doing something really extraordinary.
  It's hard to imagine a place less suited to a polar bear  than 300 meters up on a crumbling sea cliff.
  Guillemots nest here in their thousands,  precisely because it's so dangerous for land-living predators.
  But the sounds and scents of a bird cliff can be irresistible  to a starving bear at the end of summer.
  Desperation has led him to risk his life.
  The only prize to be had, a few eggs and chicks.
  It is an extreme gamble.
  He works methodically,  scooping up the contents of every nest he can reach.
  The bear moves slowly and carefully.
  He lives and sleeps amongst his prey.
  The guillemots can't prevent the carnage.
  Nonetheless, some bravely try to do so.
  The polar bear will remain on the cliff until the end of summer,  when the guillemots will leave.
  And, at that moment,  a fox will take his chance.
  Far inland, the wolves have a problem.
  The adult hares have dispersed  and the leverets have got organized.
  Their adult coat of fur has turned white for the winter,  so they can no longer hide.
  Instead, they gather together.
  The wolves' hunting technique, it seems,  can't deal with groups like this.
  They now leave the hares  and instead go in search of a much more dangerous prey.
  The largest animal in their territory.
  Musk oxen.
  A single bull weighs more than the entire wolf pack put together.
  It has a reinforced skull, armed with horns.
  There are also calves in the herd,  but they are well-protected.
  The alpha female leads the hunt.
  First, they run directly at the herd.
  The aim is to panic them.
  A stampeding herd might leave a calf behind.
  The tactic begins to work.
  But then, the herd regains control.
  They stand defiantly in a protective ring around the calves.
  There is no way in.
  The alpha female calls off the hunt.
  But the search for food must go on.
  To stand a chance of surviving the winter,  the pack needs to feed well now, even if it puts their lives at risk.
  A lone bull, the most dangerous prey of all.
  One blow from his horns could kill a wolf.
  But the wolves are now ready to risk everything for a meal.
  The bull is easily their match, physically  but the wolves take it in turns to wear him down,  risking their lives to do so.
  Trapped in the gully, the bull has nowhere to go.
  Despite the danger, the wolves keep up their attack.
  The bull may take hours to defeat  but this kill will feed the whole wolf pack for a week.
  With the good times soon to end,  the lives of their pups may depend on it.
  Summer on the coast comes to an end with one last spectacle.
  Hundreds of thousands of guillemot chicks  are in the final stages of their preparations.
  Ahead is the biggest day of their lives.
  The day they will leave their nest by jumping from the cliffs  and try out their wings for the very first time.
  It's quite a test flight.
  Half a mile to the safety of the sea.
  When the time comes, encouraged by their fathers,  the first take the leap.
  The chicks have tiny, stiff wings,  so they can do little more than glide.
  Their fathers try to nudge them, to keep them on a good flight path.
  One that will take them all the way to water.
  With the first few safely away, the sky begins to fill with jumpers.
  Wave after wave of chicks and their parents career down towards the sea.
  No chick takes this first flight alone.
  In just a few days,  an entire generation, thousands of chicks, will take this leap.
  With luck and a fair wind, the majority make it to the water.
  But nonetheless, many fall short.
  Glaucous gulls are quick to grab a meal.
  A guillemot chick has no defense against gulls  unless father can get back in time.
  The chicks continue to rain down.
  Those that get separated from their parents stand little chance.
  And even a father's protection may not be enough.
  This is the fox's moment.
  The easiest hunt of the year.
  But it's also the briefest.
  The chicks all come at once.
  The synchronization of the jump overwhelms the fox.
  The bad luck of some allows the escape of others.
  The last chance to fill his family's bellies is gone,  almost before it started.
  The chicks that have made it to the water have no time to rest.
  Unable to take to the air, they must swim 100 miles south  before the ocean surface turns to ice.
  Winter is approaching fast.
  The sea ice is starting to form.
  A floating continent is about to materialize.
  The land becomes white once more  as does the fox.
  For it, months of scavenging lie ahead.
  But for the bears, the good times have finally returned.
  Their window of opportunity is back.
 
                    Forests cover one third of the lands of the Earth.
  Hiding within them are half of all the animal species on the planet.
  But forests are complex places in which to hunt.
  There is never a clean line of sight.
  No room for the chase.
  To get to its prey in this labyrinthine world  without being discovered  the forest hunter must master the art of the ambush.
  The tiger is the largest of all forest predators.
  Yet its life depends on being able to hide itself.
  No simple task for a cat weighing up to 200 kilos.
  The vanishing act takes years to perfect,  beginning when tigers are just cubs.
  Like domestic kittens, tiger cubs  can't resist the compulsion to stalk.
  At first, it's a game.
  But the cubs are learning the skills  needed to move silently over the crunchy forest floor.
  It takes practice.
  And perseverance.
  A cub will fail many times.
  But, ultimately, its life will depend on getting it right.
  By the time it is a young adult,  a tiger can move without making a sound.
  But to get close to its prey, it must also be out of sight.
  Herds have many eyes,  and they never let down their guard.
  As long as they can see the tiger, there can be no ambush.
  As long as they can see  the tiger.
  Not close enough.
  To stand a good chance of catching a deer,  a tiger must stalk to within ten meters  before launching an attack.
  And to do that,  it must take advantage of any cover its forest provides.
  With experience, a tiger becomes expert  at exploiting any opportunity.
  The noises and darkness of a storm can be used to conceal its approach.
  It moves in downwind of the herd.
  Undetected.
  Once within striking distance, it freezes.
  The final trick for a hunting tiger  is to get closer without moving at all.
  Let the stag come as close as it will.
  Then wait for it to turn  and take one step away.
  The perfect strike.
  And brave.
 This stag weighs almost as much as the tiger.
  It instinctively moves its prize out of sight before starting its meal.
  An accomplished ambusher.
  Years in the making,  with the skills to turn the challenges of its forest  to its advantage.
  But not all forests are the same.
  They begin where the trees begin, in the far north.
  This is the largest forest of all.
  An unbroken band of coniferous trees that wraps around the globe,  the Boreal forest.
  In winter, it can appear empty  but this endless maze is the arena for a unique game of hide and seek.
  Snow falls in this forest for months on end.
  As it collects on the fallen branches and trunks  that litter the forest floor,  a hidden labyrinth of snow tunnels is created beneath.
  Here, out of the icy air,  is where the forest's rodents spend their winter.
  Prey exists even in this seemingly empty forest.
  If you know where to find it.
  The American marten.
  It only lives where, in winter,  the snow is deep enough to create this maze.
  Its slim body is ideally shaped for searching snow tunnels,  but that shape means it also loses heat quickly.
  To stay alive, it must continually search for food.
  The marten picks up a scent.
  It listens for any movement.
  Found you!  One mouse is not enough.
  To keep warm in this frozen forest,  the marten must find three mice every day.
  But with thousands of tunnels under the snow, which one do you check?  You check them all.
  A frantic game of hide and seek.
  Only one in ten tunnels is home to a mouse.
  And even then, finding the mouse is not guaranteed.
  For hunters in the Boreal forest,  just finding food is the biggest challenge of all.
  In the forest further south, prey is more abundant.
  The deciduous forest.
  In the summer, it's busy with small birds.
  The trees are thick with foliage.
  It's a complex world in which to navigate.
  A problem for the female sparrowhawk.
  Since she has to produce and lay eggs,  her body must be of a certain size,  and she's too big to sneak up on her prey in this crowded habitat.
  At this time of year, she relies on another.
  A smaller, more agile hunter  able to travel at speed through the tangled woodland.
  The male sparrowhawk.
  He is well suited to hunting in the dense summer forest.
  But he must give almost everything he catches  to his boss.
  She's twice his size!  In the summer, she and their young depend on his hunting expertise.
  He never rests, surprising small birds on the wing.
  Ambushing from lofty hiding places.
  He is a specialist summer hunter.
  Each day, he provides up to ten small birds.
  Until the rules of the game change,  with autumn.
  The deciduous trees shed their delicate, frost-prone leaves.
  The cover the male relied on all summer  is blown.
  The hunt must change from hide and seek to open chase.
  The greater size of the female sparrowhawk is now an advantage.
  She has the strength and the weight to catch bigger prey.
  Jays are too large for the tiny male to tackle.
  But they are the perfect target practice for the fledgling females.
  They can't resist the challenge.
  It may look like a bit of fun.
  But buzzing jays helps the fledglings learn  how to hunt in a place where there is no leaf cover.
  In the coming winter, they will rely on the sudden stall,  the tail chase,  the interception.
  By taking larger prey,  the females increase their chances of surviving in the winter forest.
  Whereas they can last for a week on just one kill,  the male, limited to smaller meals,  must hunt almost twice as frequently.
  It's the price the sparrowhawk must pay for hunting in a forest  that changes so radically with the seasons.
  There is a forest where the game of hide and seek is even more complex.
  The rain forest.
  A place in which the perfect conditions for plant life  never end and the forest runs rampant,  forming the most confusing arena of all.
  But there has to be prey hidden somewhere.
  In fact, it's hidden everywhere.
  The great problem of the rain forest is one of scale.
  Most of the prey animals here are tiny.
  How can a predator hope to survive on such small prey?  One answer is to be a small predator.
  This is a Portia spider.
  Rather than use a web, Portia ventures out in search of prey.
  Playing hide and seek in this,  the mother of all mazes.
  To help her in her quest, she's equipped with three superpowers.
  First, an amazing approach to getting about.
  Portia is a jumping spider,  able to leap up to 50 times her own body length.
  Nowhere seems beyond her reach.
  Next, her second superpower, superb eyesight.
  Essential if she is to distinguish her prey in all this clutter.
  Because her prey doesn't stray.
  Portia is a spider-eating spider.
  This raises a few problems.
  Her lunch is three times her size,  packed with venom,  and surrounded by a sticky trap.
  Mission impossible?  Not at all, because of her third superpower.
  Portia is a genius.
  She can map her world in three dimensions  and formulate a plan of attack.
  She can have an idea.
  The web-builder is blind.
  It won't have a clue that she's coming.
  Right on target  and safely behind those fangs.
  But a mind as active as Portia's can always do with more brain food.
  Here, there's no anchor point for the abseil.
  But Portia has another idea.
  Instead of going to the spider  she will bring the spider to her.
  She plucks the strands to imitate struggling prey.
  Drawing the spider in  to its death.
  But Portia does have her equal,  the spitting spider.
  A rival stalker with its own secret weapon.
  A bloated head armed with glue guns  that trap with sticky threads.
  One spit in the eye would blind Portia.
  But she knows how to avoid that.
  Only hunt a female with an egg sac.
  Follow at a safe distance.
  Track it to its lair.
  A dangerous place for Portia.
  But the spitter is distracted.
  She's tending to her eggs.
  Portia waits for just the right moment.
  It can't spit if its mouth is full.
  Mission possible.
  For predators larger than Portia,  there is one way to find lots of small prey in a short space of time.
  Wait until nightfall.
  Under cover of darkness,  the forest comes alive with small animals  trusting that night will hide them.
  It won't.
  Some hunters ambush by moonlight.
  The tarsier.
  No bigger than a human hand,  with the largest eyes of any mammal relative to body size,  and huge, bat-like ears to pick out  a telltale scratch amongst the hubbub.
  The darkness can't hide an insect from a tarsier,  but it can hide a tarsier from an insect.
  Because tarsiers compete for food,  they keep their distance while hunting  each sweeping its own patch of jungle.
  But while they hunt,  they too are hunted.
  They have their own night stalker.
  A reticulated python.
  It uses scent and heat-sensing organs to find its prey in the dark.
  If the tarsiers spot it, they know what to do.
  Call in the troops!  All the tarsiers in the neighborhood  abandon their hunts and rally together  screaming at the python with high-pitched calls.
  The game is up, and the snake is driven away.
  There is safety in numbers,  but when the commotion is over,  it's back to every tarsier for itself.
  By day, a different game of hide and seek takes place high above,  in the jungle canopy.
  A far more open arena, hanging 30 meters up in the air,  and home to larger prey.
  Troops of monkeys  feasting on the flowers and fruits of the giant trees.
  Because monkeys are always at risk of falling, they need  forward-facing eyes to judge the distance to the next branch.
  Which means they have a blind spot.
  The harpy eagle.
 With talons as long as a bear's claws,  and a two-meter wingspan, it's the master of the aerial ambush.
  If a monkey is under the canopy,  it's out of the harpy's reach.
  It's only when one breaks cover  that it becomes available.
  The harpy's way of hunting comes at a price.
  To fly with prey as heavy as a monkey, it must build enough muscle  to become the most powerful eagle on Earth.
  Raising a harpy chick, therefore, takes an extraordinary commitment.
  Harpies have the longest period of parental care of any bird of prey.
  They feed their chick for up to two years.
  In that time, the parents will bring it over 200 monkeys and sloths.
  At the end of a year, it's fully grown  but it's far from the finished article.
  It must spend many more months  building up its flight muscles for the heavy lifting ahead  by working out at the jungle gym.
  And, more demanding still,  it must learn the art of the ambush in this aerial world.
  Trying to hide from monkeys is not easy.
  There are more straightforward options  for the chick's first encounter.
  A three-toed sloth.
  The slowest prey in the jungle,  with no way of escaping an eagle.
  It should be a formality  but even sloths fight back.
  It's a valuable lesson.
  Hunting the jungle's larger animals is never simple.
  The chick must raise its game soon.
  After all, this is its parents' territory.
  If it doesn't start hunting for itself,  even after all their efforts, they may kill it  to make way for another that will.
  While most forest predators hunt alone,  some work as a team.
  Chimpanzees hunt monkeys by using the most complex  and intelligent ambush of all.
  When they decide to do so,  the whole troop sets out on an extended trek in search of prey.
  Once they hear monkey calls, all the chimps switch to silent mode.
  Carefully, they move in beneath.
  Colobus monkeys, 30 meters up in the dense canopy.
  It's almost impossible for a single chimp to catch a monkey in this forest.
  The colobus are less than half their weight,  and can escape using small branches that cannot support a chimp.
  The chimps must work together to set a trap.
  The most accomplished hunter  judges the possible escape route of the colobus,  and moves silently ahead in the forest.
  He takes up an advanced, ambusher position,  hidden in the branches just below the canopy.
  Other chimps, the blockers,  take his lead, climbing up either side of the colobus,  making themselves obvious to close off other escape routes.
  The last chimp is the driver.
  His job will be to chase the colobus into the trap.
  When all are in position, he launches the attack.
  While the driver keeps up the momentum,  the blockers move to close any gaps.
  The monkeys flee towards the trap.
  When they reach the ambush tree, the trap is sprung.
  A colobus is brought to the ground.
  Everyone is desperate for a share.
  But the meat is divided up in a specific way.
  The hunters take the choice cuts.
  High-ranking females and their offspring get their share.
  Males who played no part in the hunt feel hard done by,  and become frustrated and sulky.
  Meat is a precious treat in the troop's largely vegetarian diet.
  But it plays a vital role in chimp society.
  In sharing their catch,  the chimps reinforce the bonds that enable them to succeed as a group.
  But for all the chimps' intelligence and teamwork,  their hunts only succeed about half the time.
  In fact, there's only one animal  that has mastered the forest hunt enough to win every time.
  There is nowhere to hide from it.
  It is the most successful player of hide and seek on Earth.
  The army ant.
  This may look like a ball of a million individuals,  but make no mistake,  the colony acts as one.
  A super-organism with a sensory system of two million antennae.
  A skeleton made from the living bodies of workers.
  A defense system of soldier ants  ready to act at any sign of danger,  a digestive system processing piles of food deep inside.
  Even a coordinated system for dealing with all the waste.
  These are insects that, by working together, transcend individual size.
  The colony can search the entire jungle  and flush out its wildlife.
  Each day, it sends out a silent probe into the forest  in quest of food.
  It doesn't use scouts like other ants.
  Instead, a vast search party pushes into virgin territory  seeking out the signs of anything alive.
  They spread out along a ten-meter front,  sweeping across the forest floor.
  To find prey, the ants must first touch it.
  The irony is that this, the most successful hide and seek player  in the forest, is almost completely blind.
  It distinguishes the living only by their movement.
  As long as an animal remains still, it is safe.
  But the slightest twitch will give it away.
  Within seconds, the prey is pinned down.
  Within minutes, it's torn apart at its joints.
  The more the prey struggles, the more the ants engage.
  Right across the raid front,  prey of all sizes are driven from their hiding places.
  Even wasps must abandon their homes when the ants arrive.
  Everything alive in the path of the raiders  overwhelmed by sheer numbers.
  All this prey is just an appetizer.
  The army has found one of its chief targets,  a colony of a different kind of ant.
  The nest is at the top of this tree.
  The defending black ants swarm down the tree trunk,  and take up positions on the branches.
  But the army ants send in a legion.
  They lock jaws with the black ants and leap from the tree  to take them out of the battle.
  Casualties on both sides rain down from the canopy.
  But the army ants don't want the adults.
  They are seeking the soft-skinned juicy larvae.
  A whole generation of white grubs is plundered.
  The spoils of the ant war are carried along trails  leading back to the main colony.
  Other lines are fresh from other victories.
  The army ant raid is an unequaled phenomenon.
  Over a million hunters  chasing hundreds of species of prey animals.
  By the time the super-organism returns to its nest each day,  30,000 animals will have been caught.
  It's the largest hunt on Earth,  executed by one of its smallest hunters.
  Hide and seek?  Game over.
 
                    The open ocean.
  It covers more than half the surface of our planet.
  Yet, for the most part, it's a watery desert,  empty of life.
  Hunters here spend their lives in a constant search  for scarce and elusive prey.
  Remarkably, this seemingly barren wilderness  is home to the largest hunter of them all,  the blue whale.
  Weighing 200 tonnes and 30 meters long,  these are the biggest animals ever to have lived.
  Despite their immense size,  blue whales are one of the most streamlined  and energy-efficient of all swimmers.
  Their food is so scarce and widely spread  that blue whales must journey across whole oceans  just to find a single meal.
  They can travel over 100 miles a day for weeks at a time.
  The ocean's largest animal feeds on one of its smallest.
  Krill, small shrimp-like crustaceans.
  Opening its gigantic mouth takes so much effort  that they only do so when the swarms of krill are rich and concentrated.
  The krill here is too scattered,  not even worth slowing down for.
  This blue whale's lonely search for food  must go on.
  Out here, feeding opportunities are always few and far between.
  And they never last long.
  Prey is devoured within minutes.
  When it's all over, the hunters must resume their endless search.
  Frigatebirds, the pirates of the high seas.
  Soaring effortlessly on the gentle trade winds,  they can scan vast tracts of ocean for food.
  Frigates must be so lightweight  that they can't afford the heavy oils  that waterproof the plumage of other sea birds.
  So getting wet would be lethal.
  This may seem an impossible limitation for a seafaring hunter.
  But frigatebirds overcome this handicap  with help from others.
  Dorado.
  One of the fastest and most voracious of ocean predators.
  They patrol close to the surface,  searching for prey.
  Little fish try to hide amidst the undulating swell of the ocean,  the only cover there is.
  It's a game of hide and seek played out amongst the waves.
  Their cover blown,  escape seems impossible.
  But these particular fish have a unique ability.
  They're flying fish.
  With an extra thrust from their tails,  the flying fish get airborne once more.
  With a good wind, they can glide for hundreds of meters.
  But this is just what the frigatebirds have been waiting for.
  When frigates join the hunt,  the flying fish are literally caught between the devil  and the deep blue sea.
  If the flying fish get too much lift  they become easy prey for the frigates.
  If they dive to evade attack from above  they could fall into the mouths of the dorado.
  With the help of the dorado,  the wily frigatebird has become a flying fish specialist.
  And without getting a single feather wet.
  Not all open-ocean hunters are able to travel  in search of their food.
  Some have no choice but wait for a meal to come to them.
  A mat of sargassum weed drifts in the middle of the Atlantic.
  Sargassum is  the only seaweed to live entirely at the surface.
  It never attaches to the sea floor.
  This floating tangle of fronds  is home to a surprising open-ocean predator,  the sargassum fish.
  Every part of his body mimics the weed.
  His fins are more suited to walking than swimming.
  In fact, he can barely swim at all.
  He will spend his entire life marooned on this weedy raft.
  This sargassum fish must lie in wait  for those seeking shelter amongst the weed.
  Unfortunately his mat is empty for now.
  But at least he's not wasting valuable energy  searching for food.
  In the featureless ocean,  these mats are  much-sought-after sanctuary for juvenile fish.
  At last,  his first opportunity for weeks.
  He must get closer.
  He can only strike when he's within a few centimeters of his prey.
  Trusting his perfect camouflage,  he hides in the weed.
  Patience.
  Still not close enough.
  Hunger is clearly getting the better of him.
  Surely this time.
  Blown it.
  It may be weeks before he gets another chance.
  The open ocean is so vast  that some hunters can only find enough prey  by searching as a team.
  Dolphins live in highly sophisticated social groups.
  Working together, they can cover  a huge area of ocean.
  These are spinner dolphins.
  Why they make these twisting leaps is still debatable.
  Perhaps it's a form of communication.
  Or perhaps it's just fun.
  Small groups sometimes come together,  forming super pods 5,000 strong.
  And these are on the hunt.
  Spinners are the most vocal of all the dolphins.
  They use echolocation, a kind of sonar, to find their prey.
  Each hunter sends out a series of clicks  and then listens for returning echoes.
  Allowing them to scan for distant prey, hundreds of meters away.
  The super pod spreads out into a wide hunting line, up to a mile across  producing a wall of sound.
  They're searching for their favorite prey.
  Lanternfish.
  They are the most numerous fish on the planet.
  But these small fish spend most of their time  down in the deep ocean, way beyond the reach of dolphins.
  It's only when they come up to the surface to feed that they become prey.
  Once they've found a shoal, the dolphins use their sonar in a different way.
  They stun the fish with loud blasts,  then simply gather them up.
  As they feed, the dolphins work the underside of the shoal  to stop their prey  from escaping back into the safety of the deep.
  Within a few minutes,  all that's left is a shower of scales  drifting downwards to the ocean depths.
  The deep ocean is by far  the largest habitat for life on Earth.
  And home to some of the most bizarre hunters of all.
  Down here,  food is much scarcer than at the surface,  so deep-sea predators  must do all they can  to save precious energy.
  Waiting patiently, a viperfish.
  Special light-producing organs on its head  entice prey towards fearsome teeth.
  Strange yet deadly jelly hunters also live here.
  Most simply drift,  trailing tentacles loaded with lethal stings.
  Others, propelled by lines of beating hairs,  glide gently through the darkness.
  Beroe, the top deep-sea jelly predator.
  They actively hunt other jellies.
  Like this ctenophore.
  To grasp its gelatinous prey,  Beroe has special teeth-like spikes in its mouth.
  Many deep-sea hunters just hang in the abyss,  saving their energy,  luring their prey to come to them.
  Chiroteuthis.
  This deep-sea squid fishes for prey using long, sticky tentacles.
  Each has a glowing lure,  pulsing to attract passing prey.
  A gentle twitch adds to the temptation.
  Down here in the darkness, this meal is a rare bonanza.
  The open ocean may be a vast blue desert,  but like all deserts, it has oases.
  Scattered widely across this endless space  are thousands of small islands.
  These are the summits of underwater mountains,  which rise up  from the sea floor many miles below.
  The seamounts deflect deep-ocean currents upwards,  forcing nutrient-laden water to the surface.
  A busy oasis in the emptiness of the big blue.
  For potential prey, there's plenty of shelter amongst the coral  and in the caves that are hidden beneath the reef itself.
  Small fish take refuge here,  out of the reach of most of their predators.
  But not all.
  Lionfish.
  They're not built for speed.
  Success here depends on delicate maneuvering.
  Their strategy is to hide in plain sight,  lulling their prey into a false sense of security.
  The lionfish's stripes are visually confusing,  making it difficult for their prey to judge how close it is.
  Using its extravagant fins to hide slow and deliberate tail movements,  it edges ever closer.
  It must get to within a few centimeters,  close enough for a sudden strike.
  Got one.
  The deep-water currents that sustain so many residents  also attract visitors to these oases.
  Silky sharks.
  They journey hundreds of miles between seamounts,  using them as gathering places in the featureless ocean.
  They're joined by hammerheads.
  Both these sharks constantly travel  between the Galapagos and other isolated seamounts  in the Eastern Pacific.
  No-one knows for sure why they gather  in such numbers,  but some certainly come  to these oases  in search of food.
  A school of resident  silversides cloaks  the seamount.
  If these little fish stay close to the coral,  the sharks won't be able to get at them.
  Other, more agile visitors are attracted by the potential feast.
  Striped bonito  and golden trevalley.
  To get a meal, they'll need to drive their prey up and away from the reef  into open water.
  As long as the silversides stick close to the sea floor,  they should evade their predators.
  This time,  the frustrated hunters will have to search elsewhere.
  There's never an easy meal in the open ocean.
  The Southern Ocean encircling Antarctica.
  The wildest seas on our planet.
  Here, it's the storm-tossed waters that bring nutrients to the surface,  creating isolated patches of richness.
  Far from the calm tropics,  this weather-beaten ocean is home to the albatross.
  Black-browed albatross are the same size  as frigatebirds  but three times as heavy,  and so they need a totally different flying technique.
  Albatross have the longest wingspan of any bird,  and that enables them to exploit the power of the Southern Ocean winds.
  First, they glide into the wind,  harnessing its energy to give them lift.
  Then they turn and descend downwind, picking up speed.
  Soaring on wind fronts like this,  an albatross can search  hundreds of miles of ocean in a day,  barely beating its wings.
  They often spend weeks at sea,  searching for prey without ever returning to land.
  Food at last, a patch of krill close to the surface.
  Because the winds are so strong here,  albatrosses can afford the extra weight  of waterproofing oils on their feathers.
  They can duck-dive to no more than a meter,  so they rely on the churning of the Southern Ocean  to bring their prey up into range.
  Like all birds, albatross have to breed on land,  but suitable islands are so few in the South Atlantic  that most are heavily overcrowded.
  Steeple Jason,  one of the largest albatross colonies in the world.
  Nearly half a million come back here each year to raise their young.
  Adults share parenting duties,  returning every few days to feed their chick.
  Feeding done, it's time to head out to sea.
  They need to make their way to the edge of the packed colony  where there's more room for takeoff.
  Albatross are so heavy that they can only get airborne  in places where the wind is strong enough.
  Using a special runway  with a good headwind  she's off.
  From the air, the ocean may appear featureless,  but beneath the surface,  a network of powerful currents is constantly on the move.
  It's these currents, more than any other force,  that determine the distribution of life out here.
  A whole community of ocean drifters  hitches rides on these rivers in the sea.
  Pelagic red crabs.
  They've gathered to feed on tiny floating plants and animals,  a bloom of plankton fueled by the currents.
  Fine hairs on their legs slow their descent  and then, with a few flicks of the tail,  they swim back up to continue feeding.
  The currents that carry these wandering crabs  also serve as highways  for the ocean's  larger predators.
  Striped marlin.
  Beautifully streamlined,  they can travel huge distances with minimum effort.
  These hunters patrol the boundaries between ocean currents,  where their prey often gathers.
  Each predator  has an incredible  sense of smell,  able to detect faint trails left by their prey.
  Somewhere out here is the big prize  and hunters of all kinds are looking for it.
  Great shoals of fish are attracted to a plankton bloom.
  A single school of sardines can be many miles long.
  The fish swim tightly together.
 There's safety in numbers.
  Their defense relies on coordination.
  When attacked, the sardines move as one.
  Each fish instantly matches the movements of its neighbor  and the whole shoal moves in synchrony.
  A lone sea lion can't keep up with their rapid reactions.
  Even when more sea lions arrive,  they can't seem to break down the sardines' coordinated defenses.
  With a shoal this big, the sea lions need to isolate  a smaller, more manageable group of fish.
  But with so few predators, the fish still have the advantage.
  All the sea lions can do is keep the sardines at the surface  and wait for others to join them.
  Tuna.
  Their arrival changes everything.
  Tuna attack from below,  cutting off the sardines' escape route down to deeper water.
  Next to appear, shearwaters,  excellent fliers, but also surprisingly agile underwater.
  With so many predators attacking from all sides,  the advantage starts  to shift away  from the sardines.
  As the fish pack ever tighter,  their shoaling strategy now makes it easier for the hunters.
  Copper sharks.
  They've scented blood in the water.
  Surprisingly, perhaps, the predators never attack one another.
  They work together to corral the ball of fish,  taking turns to grab a mouthful.
  Common dolphins.
  As the shoal gets ever smaller,  each sardine scrambles desperately to hide in the middle.
  But now, there's no escape.
  A Bryde's whale finishes off the feast,  tonnes of sardines devoured in less than an hour.
  The predators melt away into the blue,  going their separate ways once more.
  This blue whale is still searching for a meal  to satisfy its giant hunger.
  Being so large, it must catch an average of four tonnes of food a day.
  But many days may pass without feeding at all.
  It is their great size  that enables blue whales  to travel the furthest,  roaming every ocean from the tropics to the poles.
  Trapped against the surface by fish,  a dense patch of krill.
  This blue has finally found  what it's been searching for for so long.
  A meal big enough to make opening its massive mouth worthwhile.
  The krill swarm is hundreds of meters across  and packed tight.
  The whale lines up on its prey,  targeting the densest part of the shoal.
  It takes so much effort to swim with a fully extended throat  that the whale virtually comes to a standstill.
  The whale uses its tongue to force the water out of its mouth,  trapping the krill on plates of hairy bristles that line its jaw.
  But it takes time to sieve so much water.
  And that gives more nimble hunters their chance.
  Blue whales  may not be as agile as other hunters,  but they don't need to be.
  In one giant mouthful,  they can swallow whole swarms of krill.
  No other predator is better suited  to exploit the scattered  riches that the open ocean can provide.
  The blue whale,  the greatest hunter in all the world's oceans.
 
                    Nearly half of the world's land surface  is covered by desert or grassland.
  These are the most exposed habitats on our planet.
  Nowhere else is the tension  between predators and prey more obvious.
  Out here, the element of surprise scarcely exists.
  A cheetah, superbly adapted to hunt in the open.
  Only from the air can you truly appreciate  its incredible agility and speed.
  But even for the fastest animal on land,  speed is not enough.
  To be successful out here  requires more than physical ability.
  It requires strategy.
  A cheetah's take off point is critical.
  Her top speed can only be maintained for just a few seconds.
  To be successful,  she must get within just 30 meters of her prey  undetected.
  Picking the right target is vital.
  Something small enough to handle.
  The final stalk begins.
  The mothers block her path.
  But in a flat-out chase, nothing can outrun a cheetah.
  Too lightweight to jump on top,  she must trip her prey.
  Missed!  But having timed her run to perfection,  she still has energy to try again.
  This cheetah hunt may have been successful,  but nearly 60% of hunts end in failure.
  Few can hunt by stealth on the open plains.
  But where the grass grows a little longer,  there is opportunity.
  One specialist predator is able to use every centimeter of cover  to get close to its prey.
  Guinea fowl.
  Always on edge.
  Hunting by stealth in open grassland is a challenge.
  But if anything can do it, a caracal can.
  She is the finest bird hunter on the plains.
  Her outsized hind legs can launch her three meters into the air,  and her magnificent ears can detect the slightest rustle of prey.
  Even in the longest grass, there is no hiding from a caracal.
  A solitary bird should be easier to creep up on.
  A caracal's hit rate is just one in ten.
  But the day is not over yet.
  If only she could fly.
  Not all predators of the plains must rely on not being seen.
  There is no hiding a honey badger.
  Hunting in the open, in broad daylight,  she's anything but subtle.
  She doesn't need to be.
  Most of her prey live out of sight, underground.
  With long claws  and powerful front legs, she is a digging machine.
  She can dig 50 holes in a single day.
  It's worth it, to get to highly nutritious rodents.
  Following her nose, she can sniff out almost anything.
  Even the most well-armed prey are not safe from a honey badger.
  She's immune to the scorpion's stings,  but it's not a very enjoyable experience.
  And all for quite a small reward.
  With an incredibly high metabolism,  the honey badger needs constant refueling.
  An ostrich egg would be a rich reward,  but they're the strongest eggs on the plains, and very hard to break into.
  This will require all her ingenuity.
  Finally, she's cracked it.
  Honey badgers have over 50 known prey.
  Their success depends on their willingness to take on anything.
  It's not just predators that have strategies  to cope with life in the open.
  Their prey have also risen to the challenge.
  On plains across the world, there is one kind of soft-bodied prey  that has a dramatic solution for living in the open.
  They build themselves fortresses.
  Termites, hard at work.
  It can take five years  and several generations for a mound to grow to its full size.
  It's a triumph of collective engineering.
  Safe within their castles of clay,  they're protected from nature's extremes.
  Wildfires can reach temperatures of 800 centigrade.
  But on Brazil's vast Cerrado grasslands,  the mounds provide such good protection that here,  termites are the most abundant form of animal life.
  Within the thick walls of their fortress,  they live a complex social life.
  At the center is the queen.
  Over the course of her life,  she will produce several million eggs.
  Deep inside, the members of the community are safe and undisturbed.
  But once a year, some are compelled to leave.
  The rainy season triggers a spectacular event.
  A new generation of winged termites,  alates emerge in their millions.
  Their mission, to start a new colony.
  But so much abundance doesn't go unnoticed.
  Predators lurk in the fabric of the mound's outer walls.
  Headlight beetle larvae.
  They've been waiting all year for this moment.
  As night falls, they make their way to the surface of the mound.
  There are hundreds of them.
  Their lights are lethally attractive.
  Like moths to a flame,  the termites cannot resist their bioluminescent glow.
  For just two weeks each year,  the Cerrado is alight with glowing mounds.
  The beetle larvae must stock their larders for the leaner months ahead.
  With food in such infrequent supply,  it will take two years for each larva to grow into an adult beetle.
  The synchronized emergence of a million alates  makes these casualties insignificant.
  Only a single pair are needed to start a new colony.
  There is safety in numbers.
  Flocking is a key defense strategy for birds that live in the open.
  Few sights illustrate this better than America's snow geese  on their annual migration.
  One and a half million birds,  stopping to refuel in Squaw Creek, Missouri.
  Bald eagles have been gathering, waiting for this opportunity.
  It might look like a lot of food,  but these are a winter prey of last resort.
  Almost as big as an eagle, a goose is a large and difficult prey.
  And the flock takes on a life of its own.
  An impenetrable wall of beating wings.
  In the visual confusion, picking a single target is almost impossible.
  The eagles must wait for conditions to change.
  At this time of year, the lake can freeze overnight.
  This is what the eagles have been waiting for.
  As the open water shrinks,  the geese are forced closer and closer together.
  The eagles send the flock into the air.
  Diving to the bottom causes panic.
  Now being in the flock is a liability.
  In the crammed chaos, geese collide.
  Some are injured.
  Separated from the safety of the flock,  they're far more easy to catch.
  Despite the vast numbers, the eagles have only managed a few kills.
  For the geese, traveling in a flock has paid off,  and the vast majority continue their migration.
  Even the toughest rely on the safety that comes from numbers.
  Herding is an important defense for animals that graze in the open.
  Weighing up to 800 kilos,  massive cape buffalo form super-herds, over 1,000 strong.
  An impenetrable mass of muscle and horn.
  Only Africa's largest predator can tackle buffalo.
  And even they know better than to attempt a herd.
  Highly aggressive, even unprovoked,  buffalo will trample lions, given the chance.
  Usually, the relationship is one of mutual respect.
  At the end of Zambia's dry season, grasslands can turn to dust.
  For the buffalo, it's an endless search for new pasture.
  With the temperature rising to over 50 degrees centigrade,  an adult bull risks leaving the safety of the herd  to find fresh grazing alone.
  Lions will normally avoid hunting in such heat.
  But they're also opportunists.
  The lions will need to bring him down quickly, before they overheat.
  Even away from the herd, a bull is a formidable opponent.
  It could gore and kill a lion.
  Close to overheating,  they finally succeed in bringing him to the ground.
  But the massive bull is not giving up.
  Against the odds, and the full weight of the lions,  he regains his feet.
  And it is now that the tables turn.
  The lions are exhausted.
  After a 20-minute struggle,  only the bull has the energy to finish the fight.
  In such exposed and extreme conditions,  the challenge for predators and their prey is at its most intense.
  On the roof of Africa, one predator has adapted  its entire hunting strategy to suit its unusual home and prey.
  A wolf that looks like a fox.
  The Ethiopian wolf lives an isolated life,  cut off in a bleak world, 3,000 meters above sea level.
  As with other wolves, the whole pack must work together  if young are to be reared successfully.
  The alpha female must stay and nurse the pups.
  But every morning, the rest of the pack set out together.
  Jointly, they patrol the perimeter of their highland territory.
  But unlike other wolves, they split up when it comes to hunting.
  These wolves face their prey alone.
  A giant mole rat.
  It might look like strange prey for a wolf,  but it's the best food to be had on these high plains.
  Better than the smaller grass rats.
  There are rodents everywhere, but hunting here is no picnic.
  There's no hiding an orange-colored wolf in this open landscape.
  And the grass rats are hyper-vigilant.
  The mole rats are careful to never fully leave their burrows.
  Every wolf has its own unique strategy to catch these rodents.
  This one plays a waiting game.
  This one tackles the challenge head-on.
  But they're no honey badgers when it comes to digging.
  This wolf doesn't care if the prey go underground.
  He has a different technique for grass rats.
  He huffs and puffs.
  Blowing down the holes like this,  he hopes to flush his prey to the surface.
  Genius!  But it's only a meager grass rat.
  Catching the larger mole rat requires a bit more craftiness.
  Their eyesight is poor,  but the wolf still needs to tread carefully.
  Mole rats are acutely sensitive to vibrations in the ground.
  Grandmother's footsteps seems to be working.
  Oh, dear.
  Outwitted by a mole rat.
  Luckily for the wolf,  there's always one that's tempted to go a bit too far.
  At last.
  The more extreme the habitat, the more extreme the challenge.
  The Namib Desert, one of the most exposed places on Earth.
  As the sun climbs high, everybody takes cover from the extreme heat.
  Everybody except the hotrod ant.
  As others take refuge, their day is just beginning.
  Cleaning out the nest.
  The sand can reach a scorching 70 centigrade.
  The ants' long legs raise their bodies above the surface,  where it's ten degrees cooler.
  But if they stand still, they will fry.
  They must keep moving or risk the same fate as their quarry,  the creatures that have collapsed from heat stroke.
  Too deeply buried, but a good place to cool off.
  Foraging decisions must be fast.
  Too big  Perfect.
  Back to the nest before they also die.
  But they've strayed into a minefield.
  Each of these strange, cone-shaped pits is a deathtrap  With a brutal predator at its center.
  Here lie antlion larvae,  tiny ambush predators with venom-filled pincers.
  Some ants manage to escape, but the antlion has other tricks.
  Flinging sand into the air, it creates an avalanche.
  In this cone of death,  the walls are so angled that the sand slips beneath the ant's feet.
  As boulders rain from the sky, escape seems almost impossible.
  Phew!  Some have been lost, but the hotrods are still going.
  At last, a decent prize.
  But carrying it off is another matter.
  The race is on to dismember the prey  without getting heatstroke themselves.
  Another trap.
  A silken snare.
  A spoor spider has spun a sticky cloak of sand,  and hides in the cool beneath.
  Vibrations bring it to the surface.
  Reeled in, escape is impossible.
  Bound into the sandy web, the ant is cooked in the heat of the sun.
  Unable to move, death comes fast.
  By late afternoon, the troops face one last problem.
  It's now so hot  that convection winds have sprung up across the dunes.
  Finally, home, and with enough food for the whole colony.
  They have endured the midday sun and reaped the reward.
  One habitat is even more exposed than the Namib.
  Two thousand square miles the vast salt pan of Etosha  in southern Africa.
 The most extreme open arena.
  It's hard to imagine anywhere with less cover.
  Nonetheless, there are animals here.
  A meager waterhole brings everyone close together.
  Lions can survive alone,  but in Etosha's dry season, cooperation is vital.
  Living here requires teamwork.
  This extreme landscape has forced them to up their game.
  For now, hunting is impossible.
  Eyes are everywhere.
  There is absolutely nowhere for these ambush predators to hide.
  The prey know they are safe.
  Lions are not good sprinters.
  The herds stay easily out of range.
  But change is in the air.
  This is the lions' time.
  A vast storm gathers, blowing dust into the air.
  Unease spreads amongst the herds.
  Their senses muffled, they're suddenly vulnerable,  unable to hear or smell their predator.
  Each lioness takes her place, undetected.
  With nowhere to hide,  this pride has learnt to exploit the fleeting cover nature provides.
  All will share the meal.
  Only by working together can they provide for the next generation  and survive in the most exposed habitat on the planet.
 
                    The coast  Nature's most demanding hunting ground.
  So hazardous  that few predators stay here all year.
  This frontier between sea and land  is continuously changing.
  Opportunities never last long.
  To hunt at the coast,  you have to be in the right place  at just the right time.
  On the east coast of America,  in the tidal creeks of South Carolina,  a team of hunters is about to leave the safety of their natural habitat.
  This group of bottlenose dolphins has perfected  a unique hunting strategy.
  It relies on teamwork, intelligence and timing.
  But beaching themselves like this  is also difficult and dangerous.
  Hunting is only possible for three hours around low tide,  when the mud banks are exposed.
  Razor-sharp oysters cover much of the shore.
  Beaching here could be lethal.
  The hunters need to find a stretch of shoreline  with just the right slope.
  Too level, and the dolphins risk stranding.
  Too steep and they can't force their prey from the water.
  Working as a team, the dolphins surround the fish,  driving them towards the shore.
  Attacking in perfect synchrony, the dolphins create a bow wave.
  It carries their prey onto the muddy banks.
  Other fish-eaters profit from their daring.
  Herons and gulls follow every hunt.
  To get to the fish first,  the dolphins drive themselves high up the bank.
  But if they go too far, they risk stranding.
  To prevent fish escaping between them,  the dolphins all beach themselves on the same side.
  Always the right.
  But this has a cost.
  Each time they grab a fish, they also take in a mouthful of mud.
  The grit gradually wears down their teeth  but on one side only.
  In time, these teeth get so worn down  that older dolphins  can no longer hunt like this  and must find other ways to catch fish.
  Within a few hours, the banks will vanish once again  beneath the muddy water.
  The ebb and flow of the tide dominates the lives of all  who try to hunt on the coast.
  Northern Australia has the highest tides in the tropics,  which expose vast areas of shoreline.
  And here lives a truly extraordinary species of octopus.
  Octopuses are marine animals,  they live and breathe underwater.
  At low tide,  most octopuses would be imprisoned  in their rocky pools.
  But this is no ordinary octopus.
  It's the only one specially adapted to walk on land.
  It pulls itself along,  using the hundreds of tiny suckers that line its arms.
  Hunting for crabs, it walks from pool to pool.
  Apart from a rather startled fish  this one is empty.
  So the octopus moves on.
  A rock pool may seem like a safe refuge.
  But the octopus' suckers enable it to move  just as stealthily in water as out of it.
  Nowhere is safe when this octopus is around.
  Everything living here must march to the rhythm of the coast.
  Regiments of soldier crabs, several thousand strong,  march and counter-march across these Australian beaches.
  They sift out microscopic food.
  But they can only feed for a few hours  while the sand remains damp.
  And it's not just the tide they're racing against.
  Hunting birds follow in their wake.
  But the army is undeterred.
  They swarm in such huge numbers  that their predators make little impact upon them.
  But safety in numbers isn't the only defense on these flats.
  Another crab here has a different strategy.
  The sand bubbler crab, no bigger than a pea.
  They also sift out tiny food particles  and then leave the sand as pellets in their wake.
  Sand bubblers are wary and never venture far from their burrows.
  The crabs position their sand balls very carefully  to ensure there is a clear path back to safety.
  As soon as the coast is clear, they're off again,  racing to feed before the sand dries out.
  The industry of thousands transforms the whole beach  until the tide returns once more.
  Few hunters make the coast their permanent home.
  Most only visit to take advantage  of short-lived opportunities.
  On the coast of Thailand,  a most unlikely visitor waits for the tide to ebb.
  Long-tailed macaques feed mostly on fruit and leaves in the forest.
  But these have learned to supplement their vegetarian diet with seafood.
  As the tide begins to fall, the macaques make their way  down to the shore.
 A beach-side restaurant is about to open.
  There's plenty of food here, if you know how to get at it.
  The macaques have learnt to use heavy rocks as tools  to break open the sea snails.
  It takes a great deal of skill  to master this technique,  but not everyone has got the hang of it.
  You have to be ingenious to make a living at the coast.
  As the tide falls still further,  it reveals the next course.
  To feed on this dish,  they need a stone tool with a very particular shape.
  They're after rock oysters.
  To crack the shells open, they must strike the oyster  in just the right place with their chosen tool.
  The lowest tide reveals a course that is particularly delicious  but also very hard to collect.
  Crabs have good eyesight and can move fast.
  So catching them requires a special trick.
  Before pouncing, the macaques wait for a wave to obscure their attack.
  Macaques learn their skills by watching their parents.
  But some techniques do take time to perfect.
  And time and tide waits for no macaque.
  The returning water closes the beach restaurant for another day.
  It's not just tides that rule the lives  of those that live on the coast.
  The shores of Chile are battered by some of  the wildest and coldest seas.
  This coastline is home to a remarkable little hunter  The South American marine otter.
  The world's smallest sea mammal.
  This rare and elusive otter is half the size of its European cousin.
  They live along  the Pacific coast  of South America,  right down to Cape Horn  at the very tip of the continent.
  Surprisingly, the pounding breakers  aren't a problem for the little otters.
  But the cold water is.
  A continuous frigid current sweeps up from Antarctica.
  A small body loses heat faster than a large one,  and so these tiny otters  can only hunt in the chilly water  for 20 minutes at a time.
  But their small size enables them to reach the fish and crabs  that hide amongst the boulders.
  To stay warm, marine otters have to eat a quarter of their body weight  in seafood every single day.
  And things are particularly hard for this female  because her cubs aren't yet old enough to hunt for themselves.
  Before each fishing trip she rolls in seaweed,  trapping air in her fur,  so insulating herself from the chill of the seas.
  The cold isn't her only challenge.
  Being so small, these otters can only hold their breath  for about a minute, making every dive a race against time.
  This otter lives on a calorific knife-edge,  often only getting enough from one hunting trip to fuel the next.
  Success.
 A meal for the youngsters.
  These otters spend their entire lives  at the coast,  so they must accept its day-to-day challenges.
  But coasts pulse to much more than just the daily rhythms.
  On the shores of Alaska,  a spectacular annual event is about to take place.
  Each July,  predators gather for the biggest feast of the year,  but it will only last a few weeks.
  Brown bears come down from the hills.
  Wolves appear out of the woods.
  And seals assemble in the ocean.
  The coast is the only place where hunters from the sea  meet those from land and air.
  Bears have a sense of smell 2,000 times better than ours  and can even detect prey out at sea.
  They know the salmon are coming.
  They also know the best fishing spots  and are prepared to fight for them.
  After years feeding out in the Pacific,  the salmon are returning to spawn.
  But before they head upriver,  they must pause and modify their bodies to function in fresh water.
  The young and overeager try to catch the salmon  while they're still in the surf.
  Those with experience are more patient.
  After six months of starvation in a winter den,  all this food is just too tempting for the youngster.
  Wise old bears wait for the salmon to move into the river,  where they know the fishing will be easier.
  The incoming tide signals a change.
  The experienced bears now take up their prized fishing spots  at the mouth of the river.
  The salmon are finally here.
  As the fish are funnelled into shallower water,  a seal gets its chance.
  The wolves will have to wait.
  Bears dominate the river-mouth.
  These bears rely on the salmon run  for nearly 90 percent of their year's food.
  Most of the salmon make it upstream past the bears,  but now they must run the gauntlet of wolves.
  The salmon will sustain the wolves through the rest of the summer.
  The sheer abundance of this seasonal bounty  has made these bears the largest in North America.
  Estuaries are the meeting place of rivers and sea,  and they're vital staging points for migrating birds.
  In Europe, each autumn, they're visited by  millions of waders.
  The birds are returning from their breeding grounds in the Arctic  to overwinter in Africa, and are stopping off to refuel.
  Knot can only feed when the mudflats are exposed.
  At high tide, they're forced onshore  where they must wait for the tide to turn and reopen the larder.
  A peregrine falcon.
  Young peregrines come to these estuaries in autumn  to hunt waders.
  Peregrines are the world's fastest aerial hunters,  but this is a very challenging environment for a young falcon.
  It's one predator faced with thousands of prey.
  Flashing black and white,  the swirling mass of wings dazzles the falcon's sensitive eyesight.
  An individual target may be a better option.
  A peregrine's plumage is not properly waterproof,  so he can't afford to get his feathers wet.
  He must flush his prey into the air.
  But as soon as he gets close,  the waders ditch into the sea where he can't follow.
  Success depends on keeping his prey away from the water.
  Now it's a dogfight at close quarters.
  Peregrines only stay around estuaries  for the few months the waders are there.
  As soon as their prey leaves, they will head back inland.
  Some animals come to the coast, not to feed  but to have their young.
  Patagonian sea lions.
  These are just a few months old.
  Sea lions can't give birth at sea,  they must come to land to have their pups.
  Each summer, thousands cluster in colonies  along Argentina's Valdes Peninsula.
  The mothers regularly return to sea to hunt.
  But their young stay on the beach  for they have not yet learnt to swim.
  Orca.
 Killer whales.
  They come at exactly the same time each year to hunt the pups.
  It's a narrow window of opportunity  and the odds are stacked against the hunters.
  Just like the dolphins,  orca take great risks in leaving their  natural habitat.
  With every attack, there's a real danger of being stranded.
  Orca can only hunt for a few hours each day,  because at low tide a rocky reef blocks their access to the beach.
  So until the tide is high, the pups are safe.
  Early in the season the orca have one big advantage  the pups are naive and don't yet recognize the whales as a threat.
  But the young sea lions will learn quickly.
  Silently, the killer whales move into position.
  Less than half the attacks are successful  and with each attempt, the pups grow wiser.
  The orca's advantage is slipping away.
  For the next few weeks,  hunter and hunted are locked in a desperate race.
  The orca to seize pups,  and the sea lions to learn how to evade their attacks.
  These young sea lions have triumphed.
  They've learned to recognize the danger and evade the killers.
  For the orca,  the window of opportunity has closed for another season.
  Newfoundland, Canada.
  A unique seasonal event is about to transform this place.
  It's the greatest coastal breeding spectacle on the planet,  but it will only last a week or two.
  Capelin.
  Billions of them.
  In early summer, these tiny fish mass just offshore.
  The great shoals inevitably attract predators.
  Humpback whales.
  They've traveled over 5,000 kilometers  from their breeding grounds in the Caribbean.
  Nowhere else in the world  do humpback whales gather to feed in greater numbers.
  But no sooner have the whales arrived  than the capelin do something apparently suicidal.
  They deliberately cast themselves ashore,  and, once out of water, they lay their eggs.
  They're one of only two species of fish  that leave the ocean to spawn like this.
  A fish out of water is an easy meal.
  But capelin go to these extreme lengths  to give their offspring the best chance of survival.
  For many, it's the ultimate sacrifice.
  Cod.
  Great numbers of them move in from deeper water  to plunder this brief bounty.
  Their impact on the vast shoals is small  but as they hunt, the cod drive capelin off the seabed  and up into the range of the waiting humpbacks.
  The whales herd the fish against the cliffs.
  Then they unleash a secret weapon.
  These bizarre calls panic the capelin,  driving the fish ever closer together,  making them a more concentrated target.
  This bonanza will disperse within days,  so the humpbacks have to make the most of it while they can.
  Hunters at the coast are always in a race against time.
 
                    Predators give us a dramatic health check  on our planet's wild places.
  They are the top of the food chain  and need an abundance of prey and vast territories for hunting.
  But as the human population grows,  the conflict between people and wildlife is on the rise.
  Over 75 percent of the world's top predators are now declining.
  Humans have created this crisis,  but we also have the power to resolve it.
  We meet the pioneers at the front line,  searching for bold solutions.
  The question is whether we are prepared to allow room  for the natural world's greatest hunters.
  The world's forests cover a third of it's land surface,  and contain over 50 percent of our wildlife.
  In the jungles of India, the top predator is the tiger.
  Once on the point of extinction,  its numbers are now steadily rising here  for the first time in over 50 years.
  India is also home to 1.
2 billion people  and the fastest-growing economy on the planet.
  So, how is the tiger making a comeback?  Tigers are the largest of all big cats.
  They need a territory of up to 60 square miles  and must make a kill every week to survive.
  He's so perfectly camouflaged.
  A deer could just come close to him without knowing the tiger's there  and he'd just go for it.
  Dr.
 Ullas Karanth from the Wildlife Conservation Society  is the world's leading expert on tigers.
  Watching a tiger hunt is a dream, it's just spectacular.
 You realize  what a perfectly-designed killing machine this animal is.
  500 years ago, there were over 300,000 tigers in India.
  But in the last century, their numbers fell to just 2,000,  due to a combination of poaching and the loss of half of their forest.
  In the late 1970s,  tigers were almost on the verge of extinction in India.
  But strong measures by the Indian government to create protected areas  and a strong law enforcement effort led to a major recovery  better than anything else the world has seen.
 As a result,  tigers have come back big time in many places.
  There are now around  2,500 tigers in India  and their numbers are steadily rising.
  The problem now is not so much a shortage of tigers,  it's a lack of space for them.
  India's human population has doubled in the last 30 years.
  With so many people living in national parks,  conflict is inevitable.
  These enclaves make a living out of raising crops, raising livestock  and they're competing for space and food with tigers directly.
  So, this forces a conflict on them  and eventually the tigers lose out and people lose out.
  The government has come up with a radical solution  paying villagers to move out of their homes, to make way for tigers.
  Relocating local people out of the forest is a highly emotive issue.
  India has been strongly criticized in the past  for carrying out forced mass evictions.
  It is extremely controversial,  because in some places, it's been done badly,  where people who have moved out were forcibly moved out.
  But in many other places, it's been done right.
  Ullas' daughter Krithi also works for the Wildlife Conservation Society.
  Her job is to manage their village relocations  and make sure they're done responsibly.
  Mani and his wife Jyothi  have volunteered to leave the forest in return for compensation.
  They feel very strong ties to this place,  even though they have a very difficult life here.
  And constantly living in fear of elephants, leopards and tigers.
  When you have little children,  those challenges are even greater.
  Mani and Jyothi  are leaving their old way  of life behind.
  India is changing very rapidly and you have to sometimes make  really hard choices  and sometimes that involves moving people.
  And I'm very proud of the way we've done it right,  helping them through every step of the way.
  But not everyone is happy about being moved out.
  It's the fear of the outside and unknown  that is keeping them here.
 Once that fear is broken  and they know they are better off, everybody wants out.
  Mani and Jyothi are the latest of 631 families  to leave Nagarhole National Park.
  In total, almost  30,000 people across India have been relocated.
  As humans move out of the forest, tigers move in.
  A very strong proof that relocation works is to look at  some of the tiger reserves where it's been done well.
  People have moved out, prey numbers have multiplied  and in many cases, the tiger numbers  have doubled or tripled.
 There are many, many such cases in India.
  Mani and Jyothi are coming to live in a  newly-built relocation center.
  Here, they will have to find jobs and fend for themselves.
  Each adult receives the equivalent of  10,000 pounds,  a huge sum in India.
  This is paid part cash and part in the form of a new house  and three acres of land.
  There is a widespread view that forest-dwelling people  should live in remote locations,  cut-off from all signs of civilization,  eating fruits and nuts, and that's far removed from reality.
  What these people want is good education,  modern amenities and health.
  And all of that is not available in the remote jungle.
  People want to live in cities  and you're going to see this huge transition,  where India is going from 70 percent of the country being rural  to 50 percent of the country being urban in the next 20 years  and this is going to open up land.
  And once you move people out, the vegetation comes back,  the prey numbers rebound and then tiger numbers come back.
  So, ecological recovery takes time,  but I think nature knows how to heal itself.
  Relocation may be an extreme solution,  but India's tigers are proof that given enough space,  predators can bounce back.
  The greatest tropical forest on Earth is the Amazon.
  It covers almost half of South America  and is home to  more species than anywhere else on the planet.
  In the jungles of Venezuela, the canopy's deadliest hunter,  the harpy eagle.
  This is the most powerful bird of prey in the world.
  It has a two-metre wing-span,  and it hunts silently, on the lookout for monkeys and sloths.
  The harpy eagle's territory stretches over 30 square miles.
  At the heart of it, the nest, with a very hungry chick.
  At two months old, the chick is vulnerable  and is fiercely guarded by her mother.
  Down below on the forest floor,  others are also keeping a close watch.
  Dr.
 Alexander Blanco  monitors 20 different pairs of harpy eagles,  trying to police this area of forest  and keep the nest sites safe from human encroachment.
  Throughout the harpy eagle's range, across Central and South America,  an area of forest the size of Switzerland  is being cut down every year.
  Alexander is studying the impacts of this loss on the harpy eagle,  and to do that, he must first get himself  35 meters up to the nest in the canopy.
  When the chick reaches six months old, before she fledges,  Alexander must climb up and bring her down.
  He'll then fit a small radio transmitter on the chick,  so he can keep track of her after she's left the nest.
  The mother eagle could attack,  so Alexander is wearing a stab proof vest.
  It's dangerous work,  but it's driven by a lifelong passion for the harpy eagle.
  As soon as he reaches the nest,  Alexander must  secure the harpy eagle's deadliest weapons,  it's talons.
  Today, the female is keeping her distance,  but Alexander has been attacked several times.
  Okay.
  But as Alexander starts his descent,  he realizes there's a problem with his ropes.
  Amazingly, both Alexander and the eagle survive the fall.
  But Alexander breaks both his wrist and his leg.
  Alexander's assistant Don Blas  brings the young eagle back to camp, to keep an eye on her.
  Don Blas attaches the radio as planned.
  Very little is known about these eagles,  so this transmitter will help the scientists understand  how they survive in a disappearing forest.
  Finally, the team return the young eagle to its nest,  under the watchful eye of her anxious parents.
  The adult eagles waste no time bringing in more prey  and life at the nest returns to normal.
  The harpy eagle is now 18 months old.
  Alexander is returning to study her progress  for the first time since his fall.
  The transmitter on the eagle sends out a radio signal  and the scientists can now track her through the forest  as she learns to hunt.
  She can now recognize her prey,  but she's doesn't expect it to fight back.
  But Alexander's studies show the monkeys and sloths  that form the eagle's main prey  are disappearing as the forest is cleared.
  In the face of this crisis,  the harpy eagle has proved to be remarkably resourceful.
  The eagles are starting to hunt ground-dwelling prey  in more broken areas.
  There are now less than 50,000 harpy eagles left.
  At the current rate of deforestation,  their numbers will drop by a third in the next 50 years.
  The only hope is that Alexander's data  will persuade governments to protect their habitat,  even if he has to risk his life in the process.
  Nearly half of the world's land surface  is covered by grasslands and deserts  and none are richer than the plains of Africa.
  This vast savanna is home  to some of the most celebrated predators on the planet.
  And the most celebrated of them all is the lion.
  The Ngorongoro crater in Tanzania  has the highest density of lions on Earth.
  There are four prides of lions here  and they're engaged in a constant war with their human neighbors,  the Maasai people.
  The Maasai rely on their cattle for survival.
  When the lions attack their livestock,  the Maasai retaliate by killing them.
  This is an ancient conflict between warrior and predator  that's been played out for millennia.
  The human population here has nearly tripled  in the last 20 years  and the conflict has now reached crisis point.
  Craig Packer is the world's top lion expert.
  He and assistant Ingela Jansson  are trying to stop the Maasai from killing lions  and allow them to breed in peace.
  Those animals have to run the gauntlet of Maasai with spears.
  And so, with that kind of armed guard all the way round the crater,  it's very difficult for the males to  be able to come into the crater from somewhere else to  rejuvenate this population.
  Time is running out for the lions of Ngorongoro.
  Craig has roughly 100 of them  and the Maasai are killing an average of ten a year.
  The one with the scar, MG103  she had cubs in May and two of hers were lost  and I didn't even see what sex they were.
  Whenever one of our study lions is speared,  it's like right, that's just one more nail in the coffin.
  It's like one more example of why something must be done  to address this problem.
  The only way to solve the conflict here  is by brokering peace between these two ancient enemies.
  Ingela and Craig have employed a team of Maasai scouts  from within the community.
  Their job is to document lion attacks  and try and stop people from retaliating.
  So, I'm asking them "Do you like lions?"  And yeah, there was some murmuring "yes" but then she said,  "No, I don't like lions", because a lion attacked her son last year.
  Oh, he's like 22 years old.
  He went then to defend their livestock  and then he got into a close fight with a lion.
  After four years of Ingela's incredible dedication  to slowly, gradually build trust with people,  people are very much are more likely to tell her what's happened.
  They might even have speared a lion in retaliation.
  So, she can get  a better picture of  what really happens here.
  And therefore, how best to improve circumstances.
  Craig, Ingela and their scouts have their work cut out.
  The war between people and lions has been waged here  for over two million years.
  And there is one deadly tradition  that's still widely practiced today,  the ritual killing of lions.
  The team are traveling to a remote settlement  on the edge of the Serengeti.
  This is the front line in the conflict with lions.
  We've come out here today to attend a Maasai wedding  in an area that's had a lot of ritual lion killing  over the last decade.
 One of the things that  Ingela has learned in her research is that these hunting parties  often assemble at an event like this.
  So, as you can see,  everybody's getting worked up and that level of excitement.
  It's like they've got all this energy and all that testosterone  ready to go  and one of the things they really get excited about doing is going to hunt a lion.
  Ingela is hoping that the presence of her scouts  may be enough to deter the warriors from hunting lions.
  They know these guys, they're friends, they're relatives  and everyone knows here that they work for  Lion Conservation,  so they kind of know that  they can't go hunting if that person is present.
  Ingela's head scout, Roimen, comes from this area.
  He killed two lions by himself in ritual hunts when he was younger,  and has the respect of his fellow warriors.
  Today, no-one is going hunting and the lions in this area are safe.
  But it may take decades to solve the conflict,  and in the mean time,  the lion is slowly disappearing in the grass lands of Africa.
  There is one hunter that's  the most endangered of all  the predators on the plains.
  The African wild dog.
  Wild dogs are highly social animals.
  Before hunting, they carry out a greeting ritual,  reinforcing bonds within the pack.
  They also care for their old and injured,  making sure no dog goes hungry or gets left behind.
  But these greetings are becoming a rarity.
  Wild dogs have lost over 90 percent of their former range  and there are now just 6,000 remaining in the whole of Africa.
  Mike-Bravo, go ahead.
  Yeah, we have the hot springs pack just upstream.
  Copy that, going there right now.
  It's five o'clock in the morning  and a team from the Zambian Carnivore Programme  are tracking a pack of wild dogs.
  Their study animals are getting caught  in the crossfire of a war with illegal poaching  and Thandi and Henry are trying to keep  watch over them.
  It's a huge area and to look for animals like that  is like looking for a needle in a haystack  and worse still, these dogs are moving at really high speeds.
  They're heading out hunting, huh?  They're joined on their search by air support.
  Team leader Dr.
 Matt Becker is spotting from above,  trying to work out which direction the dogs are heading.
  Tango-Mike-Tango- Mike-Mike-Bravo.
  Mike Bravo, go ahead.
  Yeah, we have the hot springs pack,  got a visual, all 15 of them, just upstream  from the Kalousie.
  Copy that, we'll head there right now and try to keep up as best as we can.
  Okay, sounds good.
  Wild dog territories stretch over 600 square miles.
  They're constantly on the move,  so the scientists track them using radio collars.
  If you don't  follow them on the ground for a couple of days,  you often have no idea where they may be.
  So the quickest, easiest thing to do is get up in the air  and pick up the signal from a long ways away,  and then, we'll radio those locations to our ground teams,  who will come in with their Land Rovers  and follow the dogs on the ground  and collect all sorts of critical information on them.
  - Mike Bravo, I copy that.
  Do you have the location right now?  Yeah, I've got them.
 11 o'clock, moving in now.
  Oh, that's great.
  The team observe the pack hunting almost every day.
  Once they've selected their target, it's all about teamwork.
  When they actually encounter wildebeest or other prey,  you'll see them reacting to where the other dogs are running as well.
  They are very aware of what's going on  and what their other pack members are doing.
  You know, they take down wildebeest  that one dog can't possibly do by itself,  so through working together and helping each other out,  they're able to take down big animals like that.
  No matter how many times I see a wild dog hunt, it's always amazing.
  The grace and speed of the dogs in a hunt  is something that you can't get with any other species.
  There's nothing like wild dogs  and if we lose them, there will never be anything like them again.
  The greatest threat to wild dogs comes from humans.
  The dogs are getting caught in snares intended for other animals.
  Zambia's growing population is creating a huge  and increasing demand for commercial bushmeat,  with poachers targeting species like gazelles.
  But snares are indiscriminate  and thousands of other animals are caught by accident.
  With the dogs in constant danger,  the team keeps an eye on them, in case they get caught in snares.
  To follow the dogs, they need to collar only one animal,  as they normally stick together as a pack.
  Once the dog is safely down, the team can slowly move in.
  A lot of them are getting snared.
  And so, these radio collars enable us to get an animal,  find it and de-snare it.
  So, this collar may save this dog's life,  it may save its brothers and sisters and other pack members.
  So, once the pack member is down, the other dogs will stay in the area.
  As you can see, some in the background  so that makes it easier for the immobilized dog  to join the group after the drugs wear off.
  When he comes round, the young male is unsteady on his feet,  but he soon catches up with the rest of the pack.
  I think the best sight of the whole darting is when the dog gets up  and rejoins the pack.
  It doesn't get any better than that.
  The team are searching for a pair of females that they're worried about.
  It's not unusual for females to leave the pack  to look for new males,  but these two sisters have run into trouble.
  A few weeks ago, we de-snared one of the females,  she had a snare around her waist  and was actually one of the worst we've ever seen.
  If you look very closely, you can also see just where the wire was.
  Her sister's also got an injured back leg.
  We can't see any open wounds at the moment,  but she's clearly not putting any weight on it at all.
  And that does not bode well for them,  when it comes to hunting, looking for food.
  Looks like they have not eaten for a while, now.
  They look very thin.
  I don't think they have a good chance of survival.
  We will keep monitoring them and see how it goes.
  It's going to be difficult.
 We might just end up picking up  two empty collars in the next few weeks.
  Sadly, the snared female doesn't make it  and is found dead a month later,  but her sister manages to join another pack.
  Matt's team works closely with anti-poaching patrols  from the South Luangwa Conservation Society  and the Zambian Wildlife Authority,  looking for snares  and searching vehicles for bushmeat and guns.
  But as always, the greatest weapon in the war against poaching  is the next generation.
  This is conservation club.
  Every week, Thandi and Henry take children on safari,  so they can appreciate wildlife and the opportunities it brings.
  How many people have seen wild dogs before?  They hunt in packs of course,  and they prefer to chase the animal down.
  Probably the most important aspect of our work  is ensuring that the people that are most responsible for conservation  of wild dogs and wild life in general  are the Zambians themselves.
  Henry and Thandi are fantastic and are continuing  to help kids get engaged in wildlife conservation.
  For those of you that have never seen a snare before,  this is what it looks like.
  The mechanism is so that it should tighten  as the animal struggles to get away.
  The best thing that can come out of this is  a generation of people that are interested in wildlife.
  Regardless of what field they join later on,  they could be teachers, or bankers, or whatever,  but just environmentally-minded people.
  The animals are important, because they are  the sources of income  that can develop our Zambia, our nation.
  When I grow up, I just want to teach people about wildlife.
  Just like Mr.
 Henry do.
  Oceans cover over 70 percent of the planet.
  This immense blue wilderness  is home to the largest predator that's ever lived  The blue whale.
  Up to 30 meters long and weighing 200 tonnes.
  Since commercial whaling was banned 30 years ago,  off the coast of California,  its numbers have almost fully recovered.
  But they face a new problem.
  Here, blue whales are feeding on krill,  in one of the world's busiest shipping lanes.
  Container ships plough through these waters 24 hours a day,  heading in and out of Los Angeles.
  When the bow strikes a whale, it's usually fatal.
  Some scientists have suggested that this could be one reason  why the blue whale population here is not increasing.
  But proving it requires very challenging research.
  So, we'll go through the area where we've had the sightings  and it looks like both those whales moved last night  to the shipping lanes, right in that zone  On the MS Shearwater in LA harbor,  a team of marine biologists are heading out to hunt for blue whales.
  Their mission  is to investigate the impacts of ship strike.
  I think we'll have a chance at this angle,  it looks like he's back into  a little bit more of a traveling mode.
  John Calambokidis from Cascadia Research  is the world's top expert on blue whales  and has been studying them for 29 years.
  I first became aware of the ship strike issue in 2007,  when we had at least four blue whales that were struck  and killed by ships just in Southern California in a few months' period.
  The port of Los Angeles Long Beach  is the largest  shipping complex in the United States.
  Container traffic here has increased ten-fold in the last 30 years.
  This spot right here probably has  some of the densest concentration of ships  that will funnel through here, coming into Los Angeles Long Beach.
  This also, right here, is a canyon  that has quite a bit of krill for blue whales to feed on.
  And we've often got concentrations of blue whales  right in this same area.
  John is tagging a number of whales  to see how they respond to the ships.
  Right now, we have a whale that's in the shipping lane,  so we're going to try to take this opportunity  to put a tag on this whale,  monitor both what it's doing and get the reaction of the whale.
  Deploying a suction cup tag requires precision timing.
  This first critical point, till you figure out what a whale's doing,  it's very easy to lose it.
  Right now, there's a little bit of pressure.
  He may come up again here.
  Yep, here he comes.
  All right! Let's go.
  Coming up.
  Okay, nice job there.
  So, that's attached with a suction cup.
  We hope it will stay on  for something of the order of a few hours.
  These modern day whalers with hi-tech harpoons  are hunting for new information about the whales' behavior  and why they don't simply swim out of harm's way.
  Blue whales don't seem to respond very strongly to the ship presence.
  You think about a long ship,  the engine of that ship that's generating the noise  and the propeller are all the way at the far end.
  What might be of danger to the blue whale  might be 300 meters in front of that.
  The tags reveal how much time the whales spend in the shipping lanes,  especially at night.
  The first thing that's rather surprising  is that the whale crosses the shipping lanes twice.
  And we see that the blue whales are spending  about twice as much of their time at night near the surface,  where they will be vulnerable to being struck by a ship,  compared to the day time.
  John is now working with the authorities  to try to divert the shipping lanes and slow the vessels down.
  All sides are keen to find a solution  and allow the whales to feed in peace.
  The polar regions are the least-inhabited  and the most remote wildernesses on Earth.
  Here in the Arctic, the top predator is the polar bear.
  Over almost half a million years, these bears have adapted to  the Arctic's dramatic annual changes of season.
  They're the only predators to hunt on sea ice  and they rely on it for almost all of their prey.
  But due to changes in the global climate, the ice is getting thinner.
  And their season for hunting is getting shorter.
  To prove this is happening, you need hard evidence.
  And there's one team of scientists  who've been collecting that evidence for the last 30 years.
  What is that?  It might be a swan.
  -Oh, just this side of the ridge? -Yeah.
  In West Hudson Bay in Northern Canada,  Government biologists are carrying out  the world's longest study on polar bears.
  Oh, there's a bear, right below me, holy smokes.
  I think if I was going to do this guy,  I'd try to get on his left  and just push up onto this ridge here.
  If we get him on this ridge, I think we're laughing.
  The scientists are like health visitors for bears,  checking the pulse of the local population.
  For Dr.
 Evan Richardson, summer is the perfect time to call.
  As the bears are resting on land right now,  living off their stored fat reserves,  waiting for the sea ice  to come back in the fall, in November and December,  it really gives us a good opportunity  to come and study  this particular population of bears.
  The bears need to be immobilized  before the biologists can get to work.
  I'll just keep pushing him in the direction he's headed now, okay?  Dr.
 Nick Lunn's team has darted over 5,000 bears  since the project first started.
  That bear's going into the water.
  It's a place they consider safe, they head out to sea.
  And we don't want to be darting him in the water,  so we need to move him back out where we can get a safe shot  and have him go down on the land.
  Though it's stressful for the individuals in the short-term,  this research could help save the entire species in the long-term.
  Once the dart is in,  the crew wait  at a safe distance until the bear is down.
  They must be extremely cautious when leaving the helicopter.
  Working around polar bear country, one always has to be vigilant  and aware that there are other bears around,  they're curious, they're going to come in.
  We have firearms, as a protective measure,  just in case of an incident.
  Let's see if we can reposition him, which might be easier said than done.
  The team have to work fast.
  Once the anesthetic wears off,  this bear will quickly become very dangerous.
  This bear was first caught back in 2003  and he's got about another ten capture histories.
  We collect hair samples, we'll take fat samples,  we'll take a few standard measurements.
  Head length 343.
  So now, we're going to get a straight line body length of this bear.
   His canines are one.
 Tooth wear is one.
  By updating their health records each year,  the team can keep an eye on this bear's condition.
  The number is 016.
  Typically, male bears would be  10 percent larger than this particular individual,  so the bears are actually shorter,  smaller than they used to be in the 1980s and 1990s.
  We believe it's probably related to nutritional stress  and the population and reduced access to food.
  The bears are going hungry  because the winters here have become warmer and shorter  and the summers longer and hotter.
  The bears need to see ice as a platform to hunt their prey,  to travel, they mate out on the sea ice,  but we see sea ice breaking up  around two and a half to three weeks earlier  and forming around two and a half to three weeks later,  so the bears have less time to feed.
  They're thinner, they don't have the same amount of fat on their bodies.
  We're seeing fewer cubs being produced, declines in cubs' survival,  bears coming ashore in poor condition, weighing a lot less  now than they did 30 years ago.
  The scientists can  now prove that these bears are, on average,  20 percent smaller than when their study first started.
  If the loss of ice continues,  the polar bear will gradually become extinct.
  Climate change is happening fairly rapidly,  so even though these bears are really good at fasting  and living off their body reserves and going long periods without food,  what we're seeing is, we're starting to push these bears  to their physiological limits,  and as they're pushed to the limits of their body reserves,  obviously, that has implications for their survival.
  More than any other predator,  the polar bear  has evolved to cope  with dramatic changes in the Arctic seasons.
  But with the current pace of climate change,  the bears simply cannot adapt fast enough.
  If polar bears are to survive,  we will all have to play our part.
  If people do smart things,  like different ways of producing energy,  I think we will have room for large predators  as well as people living really well.
  If humans are going to survive on this Earth  and do so in harmony with other species,  we're going to have to find a more sustainable way to live than we do,  and a lot of that is going to have to involve  lower levels of consumption.
  We have to accept the fact that  we can't just blindly go on the trajectory we're currently on  and expect things to work out well.
  We've got to make changes.
  We need to start thinking about the ways  the whole world can contribute.
  These precious animals belong to all of us.
  These are a world resource  and the world as a whole should guard these animals against poachers,  habitat loss and protect them into the future.
  If we can't save the planet's most charismatic predators,  what hope is there for the rest of the natural world?  Wildlife has the power to recover  and people have the power to change.
  What happens next depends on us.
 

